Added proposal about autorebalancing on cluster scaling (#122)
strimzi/proposals: 075-auto-rebalancing-cluster-scaling.md

* before scaling the cluster down, in order to rebalance the cluster and move partition replicas off the brokers to be removed, the user has to manually create a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource using the `spec.mode: remove-brokers` mode with the IDs of the brokers to be removed set on the `spec.brokers` field.

For more details, the proposal [035](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/blob/main/035-rebalance-types-scaling-brokers.md) introduced the rebalancing modes mentioned above, which will be also referenced across this proposal.

## Motivation

The rebalancing operation during scaling up and down is a manual two steps process.

* scaling the cluster up by adding brokers, then running a rebalance.
* running a rebalance, then scaling the cluster down by removing brokers.

In order to simplify the process, it would be great for the user to deal with just scaling the cluster and then having the operator taking care of running a rebalancing operation automatically when needed.

## Proposal

> This proposal is about providing the user the possibility to automatically run a rebalancing when they scale the cluster up (by adding brokers) or scale the cluster down (by removing brokers) by changing the `spec.replicas` within a `Kafka` or `KafkaNodePool` custom resource.

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning that it does not apply for node pool deletion? (Only scale-down)

Author: @scholzj I was thinking the same. When you delete or add a node pool, at Kafka reconciler level doesn't you get anyway `KafkaCluster.addedNodes()` and `KafkaCluster.removeNodes()` filled with the brokers from the pools? Or deleting/adding a pool will need a special care?

### Extending the `Kafka.spec.cruiseControl` field with auto-rebalancing related configuration

The `Kafka` custom resource is extended by adding a new `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` field.
By default, without such field, no auto-rebalancing runs on scaling.

The `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` field allows to specify a list of rebalancing modes with the corresponding configuration to be used.
For each entry in the list, the mode is defined by the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field (i.e. `add-brokers` or `remove-brokers`) and the corresponding rebalancing configuration is defined as a reference to a `KafkaRebalanceSettings` custom resource by using the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.settings` field as a [LocalObjectReference](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/common-definitions/local-object-reference/).

> This field is optional and if not specified, the auto-rebalancing runs with the default Cruise Control configuration.

Author: We are talking about the autorebalance here which doesn't involve manual `KafkaRebalance` creation. Not sure why we should mention something related to it.

In the following example, a user can decide to use the same rebalancing settings when adding or removing brokers.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    # ...
    autoRebalance:
      # using the same rebalancing settings when adding or removing brokers
      - mode: add-brokers
        settings: my-add-remove-brokers-rebalancing-settings
      - mode: remove-brokers

>         settings: my-add-remove-brokers-rebalancing-settings

Reviewer: Have you considered how to make it enabled by default? At least for scale-down, it seems like there are not many reasons why should it be disabled by default (at least in long term).

Author: But an auto-rebalancing enabled by default would need Cruise Control enabled by default which is something we don't have. Not sure how much of a good UX it would be saying "if you enable Cruise Control, you get autorebalancing by default on scaling". Not that bad, not that good imho. Furthermore, rebalancing could take long so if enabled by default on scaling up, it could mean longer time to scale up (even if the user doesn't need spreading current partitions on new brokers). If enabled by default on scaling down, it could mean longer time as well but not warning the user that the brokers they are removing are hosting partitions which will be moved. I think having control and warnings in this cases is better. It's always simpler adding a configuration to enable something (which is disabled by default) than disabling the ... disabled by default (see our TLS-enabled by default intra cluster communication for example).

Reviewer: I do not follow why would it take longer. The scale-down does not happen when the nodes are empty. So it would actually "make it happen". For scale-up, it happens after the scale-up, so the user might not care for it. Or at least my expectation was that the rebalancing will be asynchronous and not blocking the reconciliation, maybe I got it wrong.

Author: > The scale-down does not happen when the nodes are empty. So it would actually "make it happen".

Yes. But if nodes are not empty, the user could argue "why scaling down is not happening" ... the reason is because we are running a rebalancing by default to take partitions off those nodes. I think it's good if the user explicitly activated the auto-rebalancing (not having it by default).

> For scale-up, it happens after the scale-up, so the user might not care for it

That's true but user should be also aware that clients could get errors because of leaders' partitions moving around due to the rebalancing. So again, a rebalancing which the user doesn't expect because he didn't explicitly said to do so.

> Or at least my expectation was that the rebalancing will be asynchronous and not blocking the reconciliation, maybe I got it wrong.

You are not wrong. My latest PR https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/pull/9940 did exactly this. Now the rebalancing happens across reconciliation not blocking the current one (as it was before).

Reviewer: > > The scale-down does not happen when the nodes are empty. So it would actually "make it happen".
> 
> Yes. But if nodes are not empty, the user could argue "why scaling down is not happening" ... the reason is because we are running a rebalancing by default to take partitions off those nodes. I think it's good if the user explicitly activated the auto-rebalancing (not having it by default).
> 
> > For scale-up, it happens after the scale-up, so the user might not care for it
> 
> That's true but user should be also aware that clients could get errors because of leaders' partitions moving around due to the rebalancing. So again, a rebalancing which the user doesn't expect because he didn't explicitly said to do so.

Going back to the original idea of the comment -> do you really think this should be opt-in forever? I can understand your concerns. But at the same time, I would think that this would be something I would want to have eventualy turned on by default.

> > Or at least my expectation was that the rebalancing will be asynchronous and not blocking the reconciliation, maybe I got it wrong.
> 
> You are not wrong. My latest PR [strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator#9940](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/pull/9940) did exactly this. Now the rebalancing happens across reconciliation not blocking the current one (as it was before).

But I'm talking about the Kafka resource reconciliation here. Do you expect it to happen synchrinously as part of the Kafka reconciliation? I do not think that would really work reasonably well.

Reviewer 2: I would also love to see it enabled by default when CC is deployed, but we should set some throttling to avoid having a significant impact on client applications.

The problem is that there is no way to set the rebalance throttling as a percentage of the current cluster traffic (as seen by the CC cluster model), but only an absolute value in bytes/s.

If we find a way to determine a good throttling value (e.g. CC improvement, Kafka metrics), then I think we could enable this feature by default for both scale up and down. That said, I think it deserves it's own space/proposal.

Reviewer: > The problem is that there is no way to set the rebalance throttling as a percentage of the current cluster traffic (as seen by the CC cluster model), but only an absolute value in bytes/s.

How is that configured today for regular rebalances? Isn't there some option in `.spec.cruiseControl` for it?

Reviewer 2: >How is that configured today for regular rebalances? Isn't there some option in .spec.cruiseControl for it?

yes, we have the `.spec.cruiseControl.replicationThrottle` option, which maps to `replication_throttle` of the rebalance endpoint. No limit by default.

https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/configuring#type-KafkaRebalanceSpec-reference

Reviewer: Right. But even if the auto-balancing is enabled by default ... the user will still need to enbale CC. So they can configure this and we can respect it, or?

Reviewer 2: The idea is that auto-rebalancing would be enabled by default when CC is enabled. Throttling configuration is not mandatory today. Without throttling, we can have a significant and unexpected impact on cluster performance when scaling the cluster up or down.

IMO, if we want to enable it by default, we either make throttling mandatory, or we figure out a way to set it automatically. The downside of making it mandatory is that the user is in charge of keeping it up to date with the cluster traffic/network capacity, which is not great.

Reviewer: I disagree with that part. It is not required today and regular rebalances seem to work fine without it. I don't think the auto-rebalancing will really work differently here.

Reviewer 2: > rebalances seem to work fine without it.

I don't think it works fine for every use case. If you are providing a 24x7 Kafka service with SLAs, you also want to use replicationThrottle. Of course, it would be mandatory only if CC and auto-rebalance is enabled, not always.

Reviewer: If you are providing a 24x7 Kafka service with SLAs, you would likely want the throttle for regular rebalances as well, or? That isthe point I'm trying to make - that I do not see much difference in here. Its not like these rebalances would be happening without any knowledge for everyone. The user still needs to trigger the scaling and they would still do the rebalance manually afterward with or without the throttle.

Reviewer 2: > The user still needs to trigger the scaling and they would still do the rebalance manually afterward with or without the throttle.

That's the point, it would be without throttling by default, which is not safe. This is a mistake that the user can do, but the operator shouldn't.

Anyway, this clearly deserve more discussion and thinking, so I would set it as a non goal for this proposal.

Reviewer: > I also think that it would be simpler to make it enabled by default in the future (if anyone from the community raises the point) but it's more complicated to go a step back by disabling it by default instead (if the community doesn't like the enabled by default).

You would need to deprecate the current API and add a brand new API for that as the current API has no way to disable it. So no, I think it won't be easier. And that is why I raised it because if we want that, we would need to design the API for that.

Author: Agree, so maybe we could adjust the current API to make it simpler in the future? Something like this?

```yaml
autoRebalance:
      enabled: # true or false, it's false by default when not specified
      modes:
          - mode: add-brokers
            settings: my-add-remove-brokers-rebalancing-settings
          - mode: remove-brokers
            settings: my-add-remove-brokers-rebalancing-settings
```

This way the API would just work, we should just "switch" the default behavior for them.

Reviewer: No. I guess as a minimum you would need to merge the enable flag into the modes. Otherwise you would move from being able to enable only some modes to enabling all of them or none of them. But it would still be a bit weird pattern ... imagine YAML like this:

```yaml
autoRebalance:
  modes:
    - mode: add-brokers
      settings: my-add-remove-brokers-rebalancing-settings
```

It would be IMHO quite unintuitive that this has all modes enabled. It would also define the state (enabled / disabled by default) for any new mode you would add to the list. So if you would think that if it should be enabled by default one day, we would IMHO need to rethink this completely. You would design the API for it and use for example feature gate if we want to first have it disabled for testing and to get early feedback. If we would expect this to be disabled by default, I think this API would work very nicely.

One thing to consider is that one day we would probably want at least one additional mode for automatic rebalancing outside of scaling -> so that probably should be included in the considerations.

TBH, I'm skeptical we would get enough feedback on this to change our mind. This is something we should decide here. As I said, I would vote of this to be opt-out. But if you want to go with opt-in, I'm ready to respect it.

Author: I agree with the issue we have if we want to switch to "enabled by default" at some point, but it would be the same the other way around as well (switching from "enabled to disabled by default").
I don't see any good API that we can have now to allow switching in one direction or the other.

But referring to your example above, if we go with the "enabled by default", for me it's absolutely unintuitive having the autorebalancing running but no `autoRebalance` section in the `Kafka` CR. Also which configuration it would use if you are not specify any reference to a settings/template custom resource? Going with the default options?

Tbh I do still think that it's easier and more intuitive the "disabled by default", where you start with a `Kafka` CR where you don't see `autoRebalance` and it's clear that the autorebalancing is not enabled and then you add that part by configuring modes with corresponding settings to enable it.

I tried to summarize the show scenario and the "disabled by default" looks me more straightforward and understandable from a user perspective even in terms of UX.

| cruiseControl | autoRebalance | disabled by default | enabled by default |
|---|---|---|---|
| No | No | No autorebalancing | No autorebalancing |
| No | Yes | Error! CC not enabled | Error! CC not enabled |
| Yes | No | Autorebalancing for all modes (with default CC options?) | No Autorebalancing |
| Yes | Yes | Enable autorebalancing modes selectively with custom settings </br> 1. modes empty = No autorebalancing or autorebalancing on ALL modes (with default CC options?) </br> 2. modes Not empty = autorebalancing for defined modes | Enable autorebalancing modes selectively with custom settings </br> 1. modes empty = No autorebalancing </br> 2. modes Not empty = autorebalancing for defined modes |

Reviewer 3: Good points for and against having auto-rebalancing enabled/disabled by default. Two thoughts came to mind when reading through this thread:

(1) The `autoRebalance` config can only be manually set when `cruiseControl` is enabled because `autoRebalance` is contained within the `cruiseControl` spec section. Therefore, we can remove the second row from the table above this comment. 

(2) It's worth noting that Cruise Control's self-healing feature which is related to auto-balancing in general is disabled be default. It also relies on the default Cruise Control configs for proposal generation. Following this pattern I am leaning towards requiring users to opt-in to auto-balancing on scaling.

Author: Thanks @kyguy ...

(1) You are absolutely right! :-) Anyway I would remove the first one as well, because not having `cruiseControl` field implies no `autoRebalance` field as well. I am going to update the table in the comment (striking the rows).

(2) Referring to the CC self-healing, it is a really good point. I would say our auto-rebalancing goes somehow in that direction (if we can think of a "third" mode running auto-rebalancing during normal cluster operations, not just on scaling). I am towards the "disabled by default" more than before now. Furthermore, the self-healing uses default CC configs which for us could mean avoiding the need for an external settings resource. Anyway, I am still convinced it's useful to allow user to customize config so I would stick with having a settings resource (maybe not a dedicated new one but a `KafkaRebalance` template. I will change the proposal soon for that). Of course, when not specified we can assume the CC default configs will be used.

```

The user can even decide to use different settings when adding or removing brokers.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    replicas: 3
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    # ...
    autoRebalance:
      # using specific settings when adding brokers
      - mode: add-brokers
        settings: my-add-brokers-rebalancing-settings
      # using different settings when removing brokers  
      - mode: remove-brokers
        settings: my-remove-brokers-rebalancing-settings
```

> The user could even decide to have auto-rebalancing only when adding or removing brokers but not for both.

Author: The manual is always possible, even when you have auto configured for everything. Of course, it doesn't make sense because as soon as you do a scaling, and auto is configured, the rebalancing will start for you without the need for the manual one.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaRebalanceSettings
metadata:
  name: my-rebalance-settings
spec:
  # NOTE: mode and brokers fields are not available as in the KafkaRebalance,
  #       they are automatically set on the corresponding KafkaRebalance by the operator
  goals:
    - CpuCapacityGoal
    - NetworkInboundCapacityGoal
    - DiskCapacityGoal
    - RackAwareGoal
    - MinTopicLeadersPerBrokerGoal
    - NetworkOutboundCapacityGoal
    - ReplicaCapacityGoal
  skipHardGoalCheck: true
  # ... other rebalancing related configuration
```

When the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` is set and a specific rebalancing mode refers to a `KafkaRebalanceSettings` custom resource, the operator automatically creates a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource when the user scales the cluster, by adding and/or removing brokers.
The operator copies over goals and rebalancing options from the referenced settings resource to the actual rebalancing one and also adds the `spec.mode` and `spec.brokers` to it.

> The `KafkaRebalance` custom resource could be named as `<my-cluster-name>-auto-rebalancing-<mode>` where the `<my-cluster-name>` part comes from the `metadata.name` in the `Kafka` custom resource, and the `<mode>` is referring to which rebalancing has to run (add or remove brokers).

Author: Not sure where @scholzj is suggesting doing this, maybe I loss the comment?

The operator doesn't have any Kubernetes watch on the creation or update of such a resource.
It can be only referenced by a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource so its creation doesn't trigger any action by the operator.
The same happens when the `KafkaRebalanceSettings` custom resource is updated: no action is triggered for the operator, its updated content will be used only when a rebalancing is requested via a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource referencing those settings.

### Extending the `Kafka.status` field with auto-rebalancing related state

The auto-rebalancing, together with the scaling action, can take several reconciliations to finish.
For this reason, taking into account cluster operator crashes as well, there is the need to save some state about it.
The `Kafka` custom resource is extended by adding a new `status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` field.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    # ...
    autoRebalance:
      # ...
status:

>   cruiseControl:

Reviewer: Why do we need to nest it under the `cruiseControl` section? It is the anyway the Kafka cluster that is rebalancing. I get why the configs in `.spec` are under `.spec.cruiseControl`. But it does not seem necessary for the status.

Author: Yeah, I don't think it's necessary.

    autoRebalance:
      state: # if a scaling operation is running or what's the state of the current rebalancing
      add-brokers: # list with brokers' IDs to add (as part of the scaling up)

>       remove-brokers: # list with brokers' IDs to remove (as part of the scaling down)

Reviewer: The `autoRebalance` section in `.spec` is extensible (defined as list). Why not do the same here?

Author: Not sure I got this comment. The `spec.autorebalance` has a list of "modes", so the `add-brokers` (or `remove-brokers`) mode value specify the mode for the rebalance custom resource. Here, `add-brokers` (or `remove-brokers`) is just a field for the list of brokers' IDs which are added (or removed).

Reviewer: But it seems to use different format in different places. It seems like you should use the same in all of them.

Author: which places? can you be more precise with which fields are you comparing?
These `add-brokers` and `remove-brokers` fields are list of brokers' IDs.
They are like the `KafkaRebalance.spec.brokers` field, used to set a list of brokers' IDs, when you set `KafkaRebalance.spec.mode` to "add-brokers" or "remove-brokers". 
Are the same names which confuse you?

Reviewer: ```yaml
  cruiseControl:
    # ...
    autoRebalance:
      # using the same rebalancing settings when adding or removing brokers
      - mode: add-brokers
        settings: my-add-remove-brokers-rebalancing-settings
      - mode: remove-brokers
        settings: my-add-remove-brokers-rebalancing-settings
```

versus

```yaml
status:
  cruiseControl:
    autoRebalance:
      state: # if a scaling operation is running or what's the state of the current rebalancing
      add-brokers: # list with brokers' IDs to add (as part of the scaling up)
      remove-brokers: #
```

Author: > One has list and one is object with hardcoded modes.

But in the status they are not modes. Or better, they are the list of the brokers' IDs corresponding to that mode. They could be easily renamed `brokers-to-add` and `brokers-to-remove` (or `-being-added`, `-being-removed`). It's a way to track which are the brokers going to be added/remove during an autorebalancing process.

What we have in the spec is a list of modes with corresponding rebalancing settings. So when `add-brokers` use these settings, when `remove-brokers` use these others. There is no list of brokers in there.

Reviewer: I do not understand how they would `not be modes`. They look like the status information stored when one of the auto-rebalance modes is triggers. So how come they are not tied to the modes?

Reviewer: I mean ... when and how would you use it outside of the corresponding auto-rebalancing mode?

Author: I think I got what you meant now. If one of the spec is missing a mode, i.e. add-brokers, what's the meaning of having an hard-coded field in the status, i.e. add-brokers as an empty list of brokers' IDs.
So maybe you mean to have something like this in the status:

```yaml
status:
  cruiseControl:
    autoRebalance:
      state: # if a scaling operation is running or what's the state of the current rebalancing
      modes:
      - add-brokers: # list with brokers' IDs to add (as part of the scaling up)
      - remove-brokers: # list with brokers' IDs to remove (as part of the scaling down)
```

Author: Yes yes, I agree. It just took to me a lot of comments to understand what you meant ;-)

Reviewer: Sorry for that, I probably badly explained it :-/

When the rebalancing is running, its value is got from the status of the corresponding `KafkaRebalance` custom resource that was created for the purpose.
The `add-brokers` and `remove-brokers` track the brokers' IDs that are part of the scaling (up/down) actions to be useful across reconciliations, while scaling or the effective rebalancing is going on.
Their values are got from the new `KafkaCluster.addedNodes` method (needs to be implemented) and the already existing `KafkaCluster.removedNodes` one.

### Auto-rebalancing execution

Before describing the process in more details, it's worth mentioning how scaling up and down happens today within the Cluster Operator reconciliation flow.

The scaling up is triggered asynchronously during a reconciliation which isn't blocked on waiting for the newly added nodes to be ready.
In the `KafkaReconcile.reconcile()` method, it is triggered via the `podSet()` method which updates the involved `StrimziPodSet`(s) so that the corresponding controller will take care of spinning up the newly added nodes while the current reconciliation just ends.

> It means that, after the scaling up is triggered, the new pods will take time to be up, running and ready, so it's likely that the auto-rebalancing will happen on a future reconciliation.

Reviewer: This is wrong from the perspective of `KafkaReconcile.reconcile()`. But the Kafka roller, `podsReady()`, etc. will synchronize it. So from `KafkaReconcile.reconcile()` it is synchronous. The only async thing here is the Cruise Control update -> does it matter that CC doesn't know about the new nodes yet? 🤔

Author: >  This is wrong from the perspective of KafkaReconcile.reconcile(). But the Kafka roller, podsReady(), etc. will synchronize it. So from KafkaReconcile.reconcile() it is synchronous.

Not sure which part of the sentence you are referring to as "wrong from the perspective of ...".

> The only async thing here is the Cruise Control update -> does it matter that CC doesn't know about the new nodes yet?

I think it's explained at point `3` of the scaling up detailed process (around line 199).

> The scaling down runs synchronously within a single reconciliation which is blocked on waiting for the nodes to be removed.

Reviewer: I think this is misleading / inaccurate. The deletion of the Pods is possibly synchrnous. But not the clean-up of the nodes.

Author: Maybe it's misleading but what I mean is that the `KafkaReconciler.scaleDown()`method (as explained in the following line), instruct the StrimziPodSet to delete the pods and it happens synchronously. So right after the such a method we know that those pods are not running anymore. Isn't it that way? Wdym by `clean-up of the nodes` ?

Reviewer: I don't think that happens synchronously. I mean, if nothing else it communicates through Kube API, so that can be hardly called synchronous.

Author: Maybe I mislead the difference when the scaling down is done through `scaleDown()` vs `podSet()` when scaling up. Anyway, this specific sentence could be just removed because the scaling down happens after auto-rebalancing so being sync or async doesn't interfere with the process and doesn't add any additional value to the proposal.

In the `KafkaReconcile.reconcile()` method, it is executed via the `scaleDown()` method which updates the involved `StrimziPodSet`(s) so that the corresponding controller will take care of removing the nodes while the current reconciliation waits for the end of the operation.

The idea is about adding a new `autoRebalancing()` method in the `KafkaReconcile.reconcile()` flow, taking care of starting a rebalancing and checking the status of an ongoing one across reconciliations.
The `KafkaReconcile.reconcile()` flow, taking into account methods involved in the scaling and rebalancing, would be something like:

* ... 
* `scaleDown()`
* ...
* `podSet()`
* ...
* `autoRebalancing()`
* ...

> > In case of scaling down, the rebalancing has to happen before removing brokers and not after that as it looks like from the above flow. Despite that, some internal state will help to have the right actions order across reconciliations as explained in the next sections.

Reviewer: I do not understand this comment. I'm not sure what are you trying to say. Also, the `autoRebalancing()` here is clearly after the scale-down. You probably need to explain how the scale-down prevention works here and why despite being placed after the scale-down, it will not be done after the scale down. You should likely also touch whether you plan to do any validation for the scale-down prevention disablement or you leave it to the user.

Author: I was just highlighting that the `autoRebalancing()` method placing doesn't reflect the order of execution. I mean, it's correct for scaling up but it looks like not for scaling down. If I put it before the `scaleDown()` method, it looks ok for scaling down but not for scaling up anymore :-)
It's just an heads up about something I explain in the "Auto-rebalancing on scaling down" section, around line 223 where I said "On the **1st** reconciliation (scaling down is skipped, rebalancing started)".

Reviewer: But it is not any internal state that helps with it. The scale-down prevention will revert it until the nodes are emptied by the autorebalance.

Reviewer: I said it on the another comment -> but it fits here as well -> my expectation was that this would not happen synchronously as part of Kafka reconciliation. But you seem to plan that. Is that the case? I don't think that would work well because of the timing etc.

#### Auto-rebalancing on scaling up

The following flow is triggered when the user increases the `replicas` field within a `Kafka` or `KafkaNodePool` custom resource in order to scale up the cluster by adding more brokers.

1. On the **1st** reconciliation (scaling up is requested): 
     * the `podSet()` method triggers the scaling up, as described in the previous section, but the reconciliation is not blocked on waiting for the newly added pods to be ready.

>      * the `autoRebalancing()` method detects that a scaling up was requested because of `KafkaCluster.addedNodes()` returning a non empty list with the brokers' IDs to be added to the cluster. Because the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state` doesn't exist, it's a new operation so the state is updated as `ScalingUp` and the `add-brokers` with the brokers' IDs. Of course, it doesn't trigger any rebalance because the scaling up is going on asynchronously.

Reviewer: Lot of information on a single line, so it is hard to comment ...
* What if the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state` exists?
* What does it do if it `doesn't trigger any rebalance because the scaling up is going on asynchronously.`?

Author: > What if the Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state exists?

Yeah, as Fede pointed out, having a state there means that we are not in this first reconciliation. We are running one of the next or anyway recovering the actions if the operator fails before (i.e. it crashed).

> What does it do if it doesn't trigger any rebalance because the scaling up is going on asynchronously.?

It just updates the state to "ScalingUp" and update the "add-brokers" list (as described) to be ready when scaling up ends and it's time to start the rebalancing.

2. From the **2nd** to the **(N-1)th** reconciliation (scaling up is going on, checks when it's done):
     * the `podSet()` does nothing because no new brokers were added this time.
     * the `autoRebalancing()` evaluates the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state: ScalingUp`, so a scaling up is running, and it has to check if it's finished or not. This can be achieved looking at the involved `StrimziPodSet`(s) and comparing `readyPods` and `pods` fields in the corresponding status. If they differ, the scaling up is still running. It should not take long time but it could go across multiple reconciliation, so this check repeats.

> 3. On the **Nth** reconciliation (scaling up is done, rebalancing can start):

Reviewer: Ok, I guess this is wrong because of the comment on line 169?

Author: Not sure what's wrong with this line, even because Jakub's comment on line 169 was referring to scale down (and he was right) not scale up. The point 3 here is about having the scale up done and the optimization proposal can be requested. The fact that CC doesn't have enough metrics collected will just take the `KafkaRebalance` in `PendingProposal` because of "not enough data in window" error but from a rebalancing FSM perspective we are already in the proposal/rebalancing process.

     * the `podSet()` does nothing because no new brokers are added this time.

>      * the `autoRebalancing()` evaluates the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state: ScalingUp`, so a scaling up is running, but finally looking at the involved `StrimziPodSet`(s), it gets `readyPods` equals to `pods` so the scaling up is done. A new `KafkaRebalance` custom resource is created and the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state` is updated with the corresponding state (should be `ProposalPending`). The `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` takes care of handling the rebalancing.

Reviewer: How will you name the rebalance resource? How do you ensure uniqueness and deterministic name?

Author: It's explained around line 115, it will be `<my-cluster-name>-auto-rebalancing-<mode>`.

4. From the **(N+1)th** to the **(M-1)th** reconciliation (rebalancing is going on, checks when it's done):
     * the `podSet()` does nothing because no new brokers are added this time. 

>      * the `autoRebalancing()` has to check the status of the rebalancing by looking at the corresponding `KafkaRebalance` custom resource status which will move through `ProposalPending`, `ProposalReady` to `Rebalancing` (we are assuming auto-approval). The rebalancing status is reflected into the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state` field.

Author: The `strimzi.io/rebalance-auto-approval` annotation is on the `KafkaRebalance` resource which is created by the operator. If users or some tooling messed up with the auto-created `KafkaRebalance` resource, there is nothing we could do. It becomes a normal manual rebalancing and the user has to take care of it.

>      * the `autoRebalancing()` has to check the status of the rebalancing by looking at the corresponding `KafkaRebalance` custom resource status which will move through `ProposalPending`, `ProposalReady` to `Rebalancing` (we are assuming auto-approval). The rebalancing status is reflected into the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state` field.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, but if it's a third party tool, the user may find out the problem much later. Maybe a warning would allow the user to catch the problem early.

>      * the `autoRebalancing()` has to check the status of the rebalancing by looking at the corresponding `KafkaRebalance` custom resource status which will move through `ProposalPending`, `ProposalReady` to `Rebalancing` (we are assuming auto-approval). The rebalancing status is reflected into the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state` field.

Author: > I wonder if there is a way to make parts of a custom resource to be read-only by users

I don't think so. Usually you use RBAC to limit access but this could not be the case and also not about limiting just parts of a resource.

5. On the **Mth** reconciliation (rebalancing id done):
     * the `podSet()` does nothing because no new brokers are added this time.

>      * the `autoRebalancing()` detects that the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource status reports the `Ready` state (so the rebalancing is completed).

Author: Good point we have two solutions here:

* removing the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` but then the user loses track of an executed autorebalance and its final state.
* leaving the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` to allow the user to know what was done but of course changing the first step of the process when the scaling up with autorebalancing is detected because the state is not existing or it's `Ready` (from a previous autorebalancing).

>      * the `autoRebalancing()` detects that the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource status reports the `Ready` state (so the rebalancing is completed).

Author: I went with the second solution. I would like to leave the user the status of the last autorebalancing, maybe with a timestamp as well.

> During the above flow, errors can happen after the scaling up:

Author: Scale up is something already available today so it has its own error handling.
Of course, if scaling up doesn't end correctly the autorebalancing won't start because it's waiting for the added new nodes to be running and ready.

* There is an error when getting the proposal.

> * After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

Author: Actually, the current behaviour we have in the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` is just returning a ... succeeded Future when a `KafkaRebalance` resource is deleted. It means, that any task started on CC will just continue without any feedback to the user. A proposal will be still calculated or a rebalancing will just continue.
From an auto-rebalancing perspective it means:

* after the scaling up, the autorebalancing will just proceed but no feedback for the user :-(
* before scaling down, the autorebancing will just proceed with no feedback for the user but when it ends the scale down should anyway happen because the scale-down check will detect no partitions are hosted anymore on removed brokers

In general, what we have today is not that great but I am also not sure if the correct behaviour should be stopping the current task, even because on `KafkaRebalance` deletion we don't have the user task ID anymore to ask for stopping, unless we start to track it in memory somehow. But this issue needs a different discussion and maybe a totally new proposal, unrelated to auto-rebalancing.

> * After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

Reviewer: > In general, what we have today is not that great but I am also not sure if the correct behaviour should be stopping the current task, even because on KafkaRebalance deletion we don't have the user task ID anymore to ask for stopping, unless we start to track it in memory somehow. But this issue needs a different discussion and maybe a totally new proposal, unrelated to auto-rebalancing.

I think stopping it would make some sense. But you cannot do it reliably without having a finalizer. So it would be a lot of work and problems with a little benefit I guess?

That said, if someone / something deletes the KafkaRebalance resource ... I do not think the KafkaReconciler can just rely on it being somewhere in progress, or? It would need to handle it by recreating it? Or it would need to raise this to the user and give the user some kind of remediation path?

> * After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

Author: Recreating a correct `KafkaRebalance` (manually or automatically) is not that simple as well as having a straightforward remediation path. The `KafkaRebalance` status holds the state of the task (proposal pending, ready, rebalancing, ...) + the user task ID. When you delete the resource, you lose all this information.
The current `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` doesn't have any interaction with CC API unless there is a `KafkaRebalance` resource to reconcile. Rebuilding a correct `KafkaRebalace` would mean checking the CC API and reconstructing the status of a possible (missing) `KafkaRebalance` resources from there. Having a finalizer blocking the deletion would help I guess. The finalizer would be deleted when we are sure the `KafkaRebalance` reached a stable state (which could be proposal ready or ready, so when rebalancing is done).
I will open a different GitHub issue for this problem where we can discuss, because unrelated to the autorebalancing anyway.

> * After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

Reviewer: Yeah, I guess having a finalizer set on the KafkaRebalances we create directly would make sense and should help to protect things.

> * After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

Reviewer 2: You can simply create a duplicated KR which will essentially result in a noop if the previously created KR was completed successfully. This is not a big deal for CC.

> * After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

Author: But you don't know nothing about in which state was the previous KR so you don't know if it was completed successfully or it's still running. When you delete a custom resource, you get `null` and not the deleted KR. So you can just create a new KR which would start a new task for a proposal and this will go into the CC tasks queue. In the end, you are not "tracking" the previous operation (related to the deleted KR), you are tracking a completely new operation.
Also, the automatic creation is something ok-ish for auto-rebalancing where the operator is already creating something for you, but not for the manual rebalancing. The user creates the KR, the operator should not re-create something created and deleted (by mistake) by the user.
I do still think that finalizer is the way to go avoiding the deletion until it's safe, unless forced (so the user knows what they are doing).

> * After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

Reviewer 2: > But you don't know nothing about in which state was the previous KR so you don't know if it was completed successfully or it's still running.

Exactly, so you create a twin KR that would be completed almost immediately if the previous one was completed successfully, or will be executed if not. This would be only in case auto-rebalance is on. Anyway, I think both approaches are valid, so it's your choice which strategy you prefer.

> * After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

Reviewer: > Yeah, I guess having a finalizer set on the KafkaRebalances we create directly would make sense and should help to protect things.

Just to be clear -> my idea was that when you create the internal rebalance from KafkaRecocniler you would add a finalizer to it in the KafkaReconciler. Not that the KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator would add finalizers to the rebalance resources created by the users.

> * After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

Author: I don't see it as feasible because it's the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` to know when it's the time to add/remove the finalizer. See the proposal for that https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/123
I think the approach taken by the TO is the good one here. The finalizer is added by the TO to the `KafkaTopic`.

> * After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

Reviewer: Sorry, but I do not think the proposal does not help you here with anything. our concern here should be someone deleting the proposal the KafkaRecocniler created by mistake (e.g. not knowing what it is). You prevent that by setting the finalizer at creation by KafkaRecocniler and remove it in KafkaRecocniler when deleting it. Anything else will not help you because users will still come and delete it while getting a proposal.

> * After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

Reviewer: > For this specific issue, this usage of the finalizer could make sense. Maybe I misunderstood. But then the issue I opened (which was not related to it) didn't need a proposal as you suggested but just being closed, or?

That is why I tried (unsuccessfully) to stop you at the issue. A finalizer set and managed by the KafkaRecocniler for the auto-rebalancing should be mentioned in this proposal, but surely doesn't need a separate one.

In both scenarios, the reconciliation ends with the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource in the `NotReady` state which is reflected into the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state` field.

It's the user who should deal with this scenario:

* Checking the reason why the `KafkaRebalance` is in the `NotReady` state and :

>   * deleting the custom resource if they are not interested in the rebalancing anymore. Scaling up is done already.

Author: I don't think it's feasible. I mean, the user wanted the scaling up and they get it. The fact that rebalance fails could be related to some other problems. The rebalance could have been run partially as well, the not finishing good due to issues. I think user has just to figure out what's the problem and maybe running a new manual rebalance.

>   * setting the `strimzi.io/rebalance: refresh` annotation on the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource to try the rebalancing again.

Reviewer: Will the operator take over from there? Or is the user expected to complete it manually?

Author: It's going to be the user. They can take a look at the `KafkaRebalance` error and understanding what's the issue and if it can be fixed somehow. After that, the process is like a manual rebalancing that has to be refreshed by the user.

### Auto-rebalancing on scaling down

The following flow is triggered when the user decreases the `replicas` field within a `Kafka` or `KafkaNodePool` custom resource in order to scale down the cluster by removing brokers.

1. On the **1st** reconciliation (scaling down is skipped, rebalancing started):

>      * the check on scaling down the cluster fails, but it doesn't have to revert the `replicas` back because the `Kafka.spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` is provided. So the reconciliation doesn't fail.

Author: The sentence is correct, because today it's the cluster operator which reverts the change on replicas when the check on scaling down fails. It's not the user.

>      * the check on scaling down the cluster fails, but it doesn't have to revert the `replicas` back because the `Kafka.spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` is provided. So the reconciliation doesn't fail.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I was not expecting this TBH. I expect a warning, like when a user tries to increase the KafkaTopic replicas without CC. In that case, the user is in charge to reverting the spec to get rid if the warning.

>      * the check on scaling down the cluster fails, but it doesn't have to revert the `replicas` back because the `Kafka.spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` is provided. So the reconciliation doesn't fail.

Author: This is how it's implemented today. You are blocked on doing the scale down and the operator reverts back otherwise the process will move forward.

>      * the check on scaling down the cluster fails, but it doesn't have to revert the `replicas` back because the `Kafka.spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` is provided. So the reconciliation doesn't fail.

Reviewer 2: Ok, this makes sense, thanks.

     * the `scaleDown()` method skips doing the scale down because a rebalancing is needed first (and the check failed).

>      * the `autoreRalancing()` method detects that a scaling down was requested because of `KafkaCluster.removedNodes()` returning a non empty list with the brokers' IDs to be removed from the cluster. Because the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state` doesn't exist, it's a new operation so a new `KafkaRebalance` custom resource is created and the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state` is updated with the corresponding state (should be `ProposalPending`) and the `remove-brokers` with the brokers' IDs.

Reviewer: The removed nodes would not give you this information. The scale-down relies on the scale-down prevention, but that also reverts the `removedNodes()`. You would need to do some special collection from the KafkaClusterCreator class before the change is reverted. I also commented earlier on the option to disable the scale-down prevention etc.

Author: I explained in a previous comment and also on the first bullet point here that the change on replicas should not be reverted because an auto-rebalance is requested.
So the check fails (nodes are hosting partition), it would fail and revert but in this case because the auto-rebalancing is set on scale-down, it doesn't fail and doesn't revert allowing the reconciliation to proceed and `removeNodes()` providing the needed info for the rebalancing.

Reviewer: So, the pods will be gone before you rebalance it? Also, will you delete the whole logic for reverting the scale-down that was implemented exactly for this purpose?

Author: > So, the pods will be gone before you rebalance it?

The detailed process says ...

`the `scaleDown()` method skips doing the scale down because a rebalancing is needed first (and the check failed)`

So I would tweak the check by not reverting the replicas, not failing the reconciliation but the `scaleDown()` is aware of the auto-rebalancing so it should skip scale down.

> Also, will you delete the whole logic for reverting the scale-down that was implemented exactly for this purpose?

Nope. Just skipping the revert when autorebalancing is set.

Author: Yes I will set up call for this but, reviewing the code again and looking at your comment ...

* Having the rebalancing as a sync operation blocking the reconciliation is a no go for me. Having the call to CC directly withing the KAO is still a no go (see alternative 3) as per our previous call about avoiding too tight relation between KAO and CC rebalancing.
* I got your point. I can just let the operator doing the reverting but what I would need is my own `removedNodes` list (because it's emptied on reverting) for the autorebalancing (as you suggested in your previous comment).

I guess the things could work this way ...

1. Of first reconcile, the scale-down is prevented and reverted (in memory) but the `Kafka` or `KafkaNodePool` CR still has the scaled down replicas (which is important for the next reconcile). The auto-rebalancing can be triggered and reconciliation ends.
2. On next N reconciliations, the scale-down is still checked (because CR has the scaled down replicas) and it still fails if brokers host partition (auto rebalancing didn't end yet). The auto-rebalancing part checks and update the status of moving partitions.
3. At some point, at reconciliation M, the scale-down check should not fail anymore because auto-rebalancing ends so the scale-down happens.

Does it make more sense?

Reviewer 3: > If it was as simple as skipping the scaleDown() step, we would have spent a lot less time on it with Shubham. The scaled-down affects many other things such as secrets, services, routes, ingresses etc. You might also hit duplicate node IDs if you don't properly handle it everywhere etc.

Given this, would it be so bad if the rebalance call was blocking? Especially, if autorebalancing were to be an opt-in feature? It sounds like there a lot of components that would need to wait for a successful rebalance before proceeding with a scale-down anyway.

If not,  I am sure we could cover all the cases even if it is complicated to do. Maybe it is worth hacking this part of the feature upstream (if not done already) to better gauge the obstacles of this direction and see if we can  solve them in a reasonable way. Happy to help hack this myself if needed!

Author: I know it's going to be complicated but I think we should stick with having rebalancing running across reconciliations and not blocking. This is the way the operator works in general even for long running operations. Having the inner loop blocking the reconciliation in the past was a mistake imho.

2. From the **2nd** to the **(N-1)th** reconciliation (rebalancing is going on, checks when it's done):

>      * the checks on scaling down the cluster keeps failing but it doesn't have to revert the `replicas` back because the `Kafka.spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` is provided. So the reconciliation doesn't fail.

Author: Ditto as above.

     * the `scaleDown()` method skips doing scale down because a rebalancing is needed first (and the check failed).

>      * the `autoRebalancing()` has to check the status of the rebalancing by looking at the corresponding `KafkaRebalance` custom resource status which will move through `ProposalPending`, `ProposalReady` to `Rebalancing` (we are assuming auto-approval). The rebalancing status is reflected into the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state` field.

Author: Ditto as above.

3. On the **Nth** reconciliation (rebalancing id done, scaling down can start):
     * the checks on scaling down the cluster doesn't fail, because the auto-rebalancing was completed and the nodes to be removed don't host any partition replicas anymore.
     * the `scaleDown()` method can run the scaling down.

>      * the `autoRebalancing()` detects that the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource status reports the `Ready` state (so the rebalancing is completed).

Author: Let's talk about this on the other comment related to the scale up, because it would be the same.

> During the above flow, errors can happen before the scaling down:

Author: As already mentioned for scaling up, the scaling down process is something we already have today with its own error handling. Furthermore, when scaling down starts, the autorebalancing was already done. What happens after the autorebalancing but during the scale down is not related to this proposal.

* There is an error when getting the proposal.

> * After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

Author: Ditto as above, let's continue the discussion there in one place.

In both scenarios, the reconciliation ends with the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource in the `NotReady` state which is reflected into the `Kafka.status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.state` field.

The reconcile ends but the scale down cannot proceed because of the brokers to be removed are still hosting some partition replicas.

On the next reconciliation, the cluster operator will try to do a scale down again, so running the flow as before.
The previous `KafkaRebalance` custom resource in the `NotReady` state is overridden to generate a new optimization proposal.

> 

Reviewer: It would be great to include some more scenarios especially around various error situations. E.g.,: 
* what happens if I scale-down and up in a rapid sequence before the rebalancing is completed? 
* How does this deal with CC restarts? I raised it before -> but the scale-up will actually restart CC right after adding the nodes and likely kill the rebalance in the current flow.

Author: I updated the PR in that regards.

## Compatibility

There are no backward compatibility issues.
The auto-rebalancing on scaling up and down is optional.
The user has to define the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` field on the `Kafka` custom resource in order to have the operator running the rebalancing automatically.
Without that additional field, the scaling actions are not influenced by any rebalancing operations to take place.
If the user wants, the rebalancing can be still done with the manual two steps process as today.
The same way, the new `status.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` field in the `Kafka` custom resource doesn't show up at all if the auto-rebalancing feature is not used.

## Rejected alternatives

### Alternative 1

Like the proposed solution, this alternative is still about leveraging the auto-creation of a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource and the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` to take care of it without any further changes.
The main difference is related to the rebalancing configuration, because it just uses the Cruise Control defaults.

Pros:

* Simpler compared to the proposed solution because no additional `KafkaRebalanceSettings` custom resource is involved.
  
Cons:

> * No way to customize the configuration (options, goals, ...) for getting a rebalancing proposal.

Reviewer 2: I like this idea, but we could simply create a new KafakRebalance annotation "strimzi.io/auto-rebalance" with possible values "add-brokers" and "remove-brokers" to identify auto-rebalance KafakRebalance resources (at most one per type). With that, The only change to Kafka spec would be a boolean field to enable/disable auto rebalance.

> * No way to customize the configuration (options, goals, ...) for getting a rebalancing proposal.

Author: > What if users supplied there own KafkaRebalance resource and reference it in Kafka resource?

We can go in this direction, but using the `KafkaRebalance` resource as it is can't work. As soon as the user creates it, the operator will start a rebalancing (a manual one, as we support today).

If we really want to avoid a new `KafkaRebalanceSettings` custom resource but using a `KafkaRebalance` instance instead, we would need "something" to differentiate a manual rebalance resource from an auto-rebalance related one. I think we have two options here:

* what @scholzj suggested in another comment by having a `strimzi.io/rebalance: template` annotation on the `KafkaRebalance` which makes clear to the operator, this is a template for a rebalance, don't trigger a rebalancing operation. This "template" rebalance could be referenced within the `Kafka` resource, as well as by any other actual `KafkaRebalance` (used to start a manual rebalancing). So the result is still a settings/template resource but without adding a new custom resource. When scaling, the operator would still create a new `KafkaRebalance` using the settings from the template (but ignoring the `mode` and `brokers` fields because they are implicitly inferenced by the scaling operation).
* not having a template/settings resource but the user has to provide an actual `KafkaRebalance` with `strimzi.io/rebalance: stop` annotation, which would avoid the operator to trigger a manual rebalancing. On scaling, the operator would apply the `refresh` value. Btw, at the end of the auto-rebalancing, the annotation will not be there anymore (so it's different from when the user creates it the first time with `stop`). Anyway it could be used for next scaling operations just applying `refresh` again.

Tbh I would be for having a template/settings and leaving the logic to create an actual `KafkaRebalance` during scaling for auto-rebalancing. This way the templating could be used even for manual rebalancing when the user would like to share the same rebalancing settings across several `KafkaRebalance` instances (as I mentioned in the proposal, if it's fine with others, I think it would deserve another proposal first).

> * No way to customize the configuration (options, goals, ...) for getting a rebalancing proposal.

Reviewer 2: Fine, but how do you discriminate between KafkaRebalance templates for the two scaling operations? The suggestion in my previous comment was to use an annotation with the modes as possible values:

```sh
- strimzi.io/auto-rebalance: add-brokers-template|remove-brokers-template
```

That would work as you describe in the template option, but then you can now easily filter the right template for the scaling operation at hand.

Of course there should be only two templates, and we should check that. Or we can simply get the most recent one by type.

> * No way to customize the configuration (options, goals, ...) for getting a rebalancing proposal.

Author: Why do you need to discriminate. You are referencing a template from the `Kafka` CR where you are specifying the mode (add or remove). So it's in the `Kafka` CR where you are saying "for add-brokers mode use this template <name>", "for remove-brokers mode use this template <name>". It's exactly the same as the current proposal with `KafkaRebalanceSettings` but using a `KafkaRebalance` as template instead.
I don't get why the settings/template custom resource should be aware of which mode it's used.

> Of course there should be only two templates, and we should check that. Or we can simply get the most recent one by type.

Why only two templates? We can make this work even for the manual rebalance where you have your own `KafkaRebalance` refering a template (as this proposal with settings).
You could even use a template to be referenced for auto-rebalancing or manual rebalancing if you need common goals and configuration.

> * No way to customize the configuration (options, goals, ...) for getting a rebalancing proposal.

Reviewer 2: In my original suggestion the .spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance was a simple boolean value to enable disable the feature, and all the logic was based on the annotation, but I think it's better as you propose, as it is explicit configuration.

> * No way to customize the configuration (options, goals, ...) for getting a rebalancing proposal.

Reviewer 3: The `strimzi.io/rebalance: template` approach sounds reasonable to me

It means that we should factor out the Cruise Control rebalancing FSM (and all the corresponding interaction with the Cruise Control API) from the current `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator`.
This way, the Cruise Control rebalancing FSM could be used directly by both the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` for the user initiated rebalancing as today and the `KafkaAssemblyOperator` for the auto-rebalancing feature (a reference example could be the KRaft migration FSM).

In the first scenario, the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` should be able to interact directly with the Cruise Control rebalancing FSM by getting any rebalancing parameter from the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource created by the user.
In the second scenario, the `KafkaAssemblyOperator` should be able to interact directly with the Cruise Control rebalancing FSM by getting any rebalancing parameter from a settings resource or from the Cruise Control defaults, without any need for an auto-created `KafkaRebalance` custom resource which is the main goal of this alternative.

Pros:

* No automatic `KafkaRebalance` custom resource creation.

> * No user confusion between auto-created and manually-created `KafkaRebalance` custom resources.

Author: This would be the first time that the Strimzi Operator automatically creates a user facing custom resource (the `KafkaRebalance` one). Until now the only non-user facing automatically created custom resource is the `StrimziPodSet` one.

> * No user confusion between auto-created and manually-created `KafkaRebalance` custom resources.

Reviewer 2: Thinking out loud. Could we create a virtual one? Something like the virtual node pool we used in the past.

> * No user confusion between auto-created and manually-created `KafkaRebalance` custom resources.

Author: That could be an idea but how to leverage the current `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` which is "watching" for actual custom resources. @scholzj from your "virtual" node pool experience, is it feasible somehow?

> * No user confusion between auto-created and manually-created `KafkaRebalance` custom resources.

Reviewer 3: I ask because I am curious if custom resources in general were designed to be created and configured by K8s Operators and not just by users? If not, what the consequences of doing so could be. More importantly, I was wondering if Strimzi custom resources were designed in this way too, and if not, if there were are any obvious consequences of doing so. I need to think more on this

Cons:

* More complex and more work on factoring out the Cruise Control rebalancing FSM from the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator`.
* Not leveraging the already ready-to-use `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` through a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.

> * `KafkaAssemblyOperator` strongly tight to the Cruise Control rebalancing FSM with additional complexity for testing.

Reviewer 3: I agree that for this feature it would be simplest to reuse the logic of the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` through the `KafkaRebalance` resource **BUT** in the long run it would be wiser to factor out the CC rebalancing FSM first, decoupling it from the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` for the following reasons:

(1) It would help us consolidate the CC client code used by other Strimzi components like the Topic Operator (from what I understood we were planning on moving toward this direction anyway after the replication factor work)

(2) It would simplify the existing `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` which is already pretty complicated and difficult to debug/extend

(3) It would simplify the addition of new features that leverage the CC API - especially the CC Self-Healing support which is the next logical feature after we nail the auto-balancing feature.

If we don't clean this now it'll be harder to in the future because more features will be dependent on it. It'll not be an easy job to refactor but if people agree to go in this direction I will help with it and suffer with you or whoever decides to implement the autobalancing.

Author: The alternative 3 was mostly rejected because the last point, not because of factoring out the rebalance FSM.
If we want, it's something we can still do but unrelated to this proposal.
I mean the bigger problem is having the `KafkaAssemblyOperator` using directly the FSM which would add more complexity for testing. This is why we would like to leverage the rebalancing we have today through the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator`.
But again, doing this way, doesn't mean that we can't factor out the rebalancing FSM. We can do that but it will be still used in the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` only and not within the `KafkaAssemblyOperator` for auto-rebalancing purposes.

Reviewer 2: The CC client sharing is still in my backlog. I will come to it as soon as pending TO refactoring tasks are completed.

Author: But the CC client sharing is totally different from factoring out the rebalancing FSM. They are two different and unrelated things.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I agree. Just wanted to confirm it's still in the plan. Factoring out the rebalancing FSM would require a dedicated proposal, like the CC client sharing.

Reviewer 3: > I mean the bigger problem is having the KafkaAssemblyOperator using directly the FSM which would add more complexity for testing. This is why we would like to leverage the rebalancing we have today through the KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator.

You both are right, factoring out the rebalance FSM is a big piece of work that merits its own PR.

From what I understand, this obstacle is what prevents us from easily using the rebalance FSM directly for the auto-rebalancing work.

A couple of things I have been mulling over:

(1) Is the creation, manipulation, and management of custom resource content supposed to be in the domain of the operator or just the end users? 

(2) For adding support for other Cruise Control features like self-healing or brokers demotion, the operator would benefit from being able to hit rebalance FSM directly. If we had these features hit the rebalance FSM directly, would we want to update the autoscale rebalance feature to hit the rebalance FSM directly as well at a later date?

(3) Although the CC client sharing work is a separate task, are there any ideas from the Topic Operator replication factor work that we can reuse here? I would imagine that the CC client code used by the TO  would have solved challenges similar to the ones we will face with autorebalancing and other CC features we may hope to support in the future

Author: > From what I understand, this obstacle is what prevents us from easily using the rebalance FSM directly for the auto-rebalancing work.

No. The thing is that using rebalance FSM directly in the `KafkaAssemblyOperator` means tightening it to rebalance stuff and making less testable. 

Regarding (1) ... not sure I got what you mean.
Regarding (2) ... see my first answer. Not sure how self-healing would been added but I don't think it would be within the `KafkaAssemblyOperator`
Regarding (3) ... I think CC client sharing doesn't have any impact on the auto-rebalancing. We are currently using the one in the cluster operator. One day we'll use the common one. In the end it's just the client for calling the CC REST API.

Reviewer 3: > Regarding (1) ... not sure I got what you mean.

I mean to ask: Were custom resources in general were designed to be created and configured by K8s Operators and not just by users? Furthermore, I wonder if Strimzi custom resources were in this way too, and if not, are there are any obvious consequences of doing so. I need to think more on this

> Regarding (2) ... see my first answer. Not sure how self-healing would been added but I don't think it would be within the KafkaAssemblyOperator

I interpreted Alternative 3 more as: Hitting the CC API directly instead of using the `KafkaRebalance` resource. Despite the immediate obstacles of doing so I was thinking that it may be easier route to follow for the long run. Let me think more on this, I haven't looked that deep into the KAO or KRBAO code yet

Author: > Hitting the CC API directly instead of using the KafkaRebalance resource

And your understanding is right but it's unrelated to the CC API client refactoring.
As I mentioned, alternatives 3 brings KAO to be strictly tight to CC which is something we want to avoid because it's focused on handling `Kafka` custom resources not calling other external stuff. It's the role of the KRAO by handling `KafkaRebalance`. Also testing KAO would be more difficult.

     * the checks on scaling down the cluster don't fail, because the auto-rebalancing was completed and the nodes to be removed don't host any partition replicas anymore.
     * the `scaleDown()` method can run the scaling down.
     * the `autoRebalancing()` detects that the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource status reports the `Ready` state (so the rebalancing is completed). The end of rebalancing is reflected into the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` field and the `KafkaRebalance` is deleted.

During the above flow, errors can happen before the scaling down:

* There is an error when getting the proposal.
* After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

In both scenarios, the reconciliation ends with the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource in the `NotReady` state which is reflected into the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` field.

The reconcile ends but the scale down cannot proceed because the brokers to be removed are still hosting some partition replicas.

On the next reconciliation, the cluster operator will try to do a scale down again, so running the flow as before.

> The previous `KafkaRebalance` custom resource in the `NotReady` state is overridden to generate a new optimization proposal.

Reviewer 4: If I am understanding correctly this is different behaviour to the scale up flow. In that flow if something goes wrong it's left completely to the user to manually retry the rebalance, however here the operator retries automatically. I assume the reason is because the scale down hasn't happened yet, so the operator has to keep trying. However, I wonder if having the different behaviour is confusing. Maybe it would be better to fail/block the scale down if the rebalance fails, we could follow what happens today if you try to scale down when there are still partitions on the broker you are removing. Then similar to scale up the user just has to manually sort the rebalance before trying the scale down again

Reviewer 4: That makes more sense to me, it gives the user two options if an error happens, either they delete the KR and let the operator try again, or they handle it themselves. And means it's a similar process for both scale up and down which is less confusing.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    # ...
    autoRebalance:
      # using the default Cruise Control rebalancing configuration when adding or removing brokers
      - mode: add-brokers
      - mode: remove-brokers
```

The user can even decide to use a different configuration when adding or removing brokers.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    replicas: 3
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    # ...
    autoRebalance:
      # using specific configuration when adding brokers
      - mode: add-brokers
        config: my-add-brokers-rebalancing-config
      # using different configuration when removing brokers  
      - mode: remove-brokers
        config: my-remove-brokers-rebalancing-config
```

The user could even decide to have auto-rebalancing only when adding or removing brokers but not for both.
This way provides the greatest flexibility to describe in which case to run the auto-rebalancing and with which configuration.

> The auto-rebalance configuration for the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.config` property in the `Kafka` custom resource is provided through a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource defined as a "template".

Author: Yeah, good point it should and I think we have a couple options here:

* when running an autorebalance, it just logs a warning and uses the default Cruise Control configuration as when the template is not specified at all.
* fails the reconciliation but in this case, when there is a scale up, it ran anyway and the autorebalance should be started in a later reconciliation when the template reference is fixed.

The first one is the simpler one even if it makes a decision for the user who could have just forgot the annotation. The second one could be more complex to handle the state across reconciliations, but looks like better to me. Wdyt?

> The auto-rebalance configuration for the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.config` property in the `Kafka` custom resource is provided through a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource defined as a "template".

Reviewer: The second option seems like asking for troubles as you would need to carr the scale-up information for possibly a long time until the user fixes it. The first one seems easier. I guess other option is reporting an error and just ignoring the the scaling (as if autorebalance was disabled)

> The auto-rebalance configuration for the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.config` property in the `Kafka` custom resource is provided through a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource defined as a "template".

Author: > I guess other option is reporting an error and just ignoring the the scaling (as if autorebalance was disabled)

So we assume autorebalance is disabled (because of wrong template reference) but what do you mean by "ignoring the scaling"? I mean, without autorebalance enabled, a scale down could be blocked (because we can't run the rebalancing first) but the scale up would run (without the subsequent rebalancing). Can you clarify your thoughts here please?

> The auto-rebalance configuration for the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.config` property in the `Kafka` custom resource is provided through a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource defined as a "template".

Reviewer: I mean you would raise the error and do no auto-rebalancing. For scale-up, that will be it and it will be up to the user to do it. For scale-down, it will come up again and again until the user fixes the configuration or until the brokers are empty somehow.

> The auto-rebalance configuration for the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.config` property in the `Kafka` custom resource is provided through a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource defined as a "template".

Author: Ah ok. I would go this way then. In general, I don't like having the operator making decisions for the user that much (like running rebalancing anyway but with default CC settings). With your suggestion, the user is the owner of their destiny :-D

That is a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource with the `strimzi.io/rebalance: template` annotation set.
When it is created, the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` doesn't run any rebalancing.
This is because it doesn't represent an "actual" rebalance request to get an optimization proposal, but it's just the place where configuration related to auto-rebalancing is defined.
The user can specify rebalancing goals and options, such as `skipHardGoalCheck`, within the resource.
When such a "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource is referenced within the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.config` field for one or more modes, the operator asks to Cruise Control for an optimization proposal with such configuration.

> If the `mode` and `brokers` fields are set, they will be just ignored because the resource doesn't represent an "actual" rebalancing.

Author: Why `rebalanceDisk` should be ignored? I am ignoring `mode` and `brokers` because these fields are implied by the scaling (up = add brokers mode, down = remove brokers mode) and the nodes being added and removed (during scaling). All other fields from a `KafkaRebalance` can be used instead.

> If the `mode` and `brokers` fields are set, they will be just ignored because the resource doesn't represent an "actual" rebalancing.

Reviewer: And how would you add or remove brokers with intra-broker balancing? I think you have to ignore it otherwise such autorebalance would be useless (in general, I guess it doesn't make sense to mix add / remove brokers with intra broker baůancing).

> If the `mode` and `brokers` fields are set, they will be just ignored because the resource doesn't represent an "actual" rebalancing.

Author: Yeah you are right. What's the point of rebalancing within a broker which is going to be removed :-)

The operator copies over goals and rebalancing options from the referenced "template" resource to the "actual" rebalancing one and also adds the `spec.mode` and `spec.brokers` to it, based on the scaling operation the user asked for and on which brokers.
This is the reason way the same fields specified in the "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource are ignored.
The "actual" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource could be named as `<my-cluster-name>-auto-rebalancing-<mode>` where the `<my-cluster-name>` part comes from the `metadata.name` in the `Kafka` custom resource, and the `<mode>` is referring to which rebalancing has to run (add or remove brokers).

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: my-cluster-auto-rebalancing-add-brokers
  finalizers:
    - strimzi.io/rebalance
spec:
  mode: add-brokers
  brokers: [3,4]
  goals:
    - CpuCapacityGoal
    - NetworkInboundCapacityGoal
    - DiskCapacityGoal
    - RackAwareGoal
    - MinTopicLeadersPerBrokerGoal
    - NetworkOutboundCapacityGoal
    - ReplicaCapacityGoal
  skipHardGoalCheck: true
  # ... other rebalancing related configuration
```

> The operator also sets a finalizer, named `strimzi.io/rebalance`, on the "actual" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.

Author: Yeah better name. I am going to use `strimzi.io/auto-rebalancing` just because it seems all other annotations follow this syntax.

The `Kafka` custom resource is extended by adding a new `status.autoRebalance` field.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    # ...
    autoRebalance:
      # ...
status:
  autoRebalance:
    lastTransitionTime: # timestamp of last transition during the auto-rebalancing flow
    state: # if a scaling operation is running or what's the state of the current rebalancing
    modes:
      - mode: add-brokers
        brokers: # list with brokers' IDs to add (as part of the scaling up)
      - mode: remove-brokers
        brokers: # list with brokers' IDs to remove (as part of the scaling down)
```

The `state` field provides the current state of the rebalancing operation, reflecting if it's for a scale down (`RebalancingOnScaleDown` value) or scale up (`RebalancingOnScaleUp` value).
When the rebalancing is running, its value is inferred from the status of the corresponding "actual" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource that was created for that purpose.
The `lastTransitionTime` field provides the timestamp of the latest auto-rebalancing state update.

> The `modes` field lists the enabled rebalancing modes, as defined through the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field, with the corresponding `brokers` list containing the brokers' IDs that are part of the scaling (up/down) actions to be useful across reconciliations.

Author: They are the enabled modes kind of mirroring what we have in the spec. This part is mostly for storing the brokers' IDs so I need the mode to which they are related to.

> The `modes` field lists the enabled rebalancing modes, as defined through the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field, with the corresponding `brokers` list containing the brokers' IDs that are part of the scaling (up/down) actions to be useful across reconciliations.

Reviewer: Why do you need it if there is no scaling happening? I think we should keep the status lean -> when nor autorebalance is happening, the status should IMHO not be present at all.

> The `modes` field lists the enabled rebalancing modes, as defined through the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field, with the corresponding `brokers` list containing the brokers' IDs that are part of the scaling (up/down) actions to be useful across reconciliations.

Author: I see your point but, while avoiding the mode/brokers could work for scale down because it provides you the list of removed brokers each time, it can't work for scale up. If scale up happens but the rebalancing can't happen in the same reconciliation for any reasons (there is a rebalancing for scale down already running, operator restarts, ...), we need to have the brokers list in the status for a future reconciliation (because it won't be provided anymore). So I can understand that status should have what's going on but in this case we need those info soon. Related to another comment from Kate, I am thinking I could need a `state` for each mode and not for the overall auto-rebalancing. This `state` could clarify more the overall auto-rebalancing status. I am still thinking about it.

> The `modes` field lists the enabled rebalancing modes, as defined through the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field, with the corresponding `brokers` list containing the brokers' IDs that are part of the scaling (up/down) actions to be useful across reconciliations.

Reviewer: But most of the time, there is no scale-up in progress and it would be anyway empty. So why do you want to keep it there? The same applies for the state. What is the state when nothing is going on in the auto-rebalancing?

> The `modes` field lists the enabled rebalancing modes, as defined through the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field, with the corresponding `brokers` list containing the brokers' IDs that are part of the scaling (up/down) actions to be useful across reconciliations.

Author: I am not saying that the mode/brokers fields are there since the beginning. What I am saying is that they have to be there even if the actual rebalancing is not running yet. So the delayed scale-up example which is important to get the brokers to scale up when the list is empty.
So if the user doesn't do a scale down and up at the same time, but just one, the mode/brokers list will contain just the one running.

> The `modes` field lists the enabled rebalancing modes, as defined through the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field, with the corresponding `brokers` list containing the brokers' IDs that are part of the scaling (up/down) actions to be useful across reconciliations.

Reviewer: You are saying `The modes field lists the enabled rebalancing modes` -> I cannot help myself but I read it only one way ... if the mode is enabled it is listed. So maybe you should rephrase it to something like `The modes field lists contains the enabled modes with some ongoing or planned auto-rebalancing ...`?

> The `modes` field lists the enabled rebalancing modes, as defined through the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field, with the corresponding `brokers` list containing the brokers' IDs that are part of the scaling (up/down) actions to be useful across reconciliations.

Reviewer 4: I agree with Jakub, based on my understanding of what you describe later in the proposal what about:
```suggestion
The `modes` field is used to store a list of brokers' IDs that were part of the scaling (up/down) action that triggered an auto-rebalance to be used by the operator across reconciliations. For each enabled rebalancing mode, as defined through the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field, it contains either:
  - the brokers' IDs relevant to the current ongoing auto-rebalance, or
  - the brokers' IDs relevant to a queued auto-rebalance (if a previous auto-rebalance is still in progress)
```

> The `modes` field lists the enabled rebalancing modes, as defined through the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field, with the corresponding `brokers` list containing the brokers' IDs that are part of the scaling (up/down) actions to be useful across reconciliations.

Author: I got you Jakub. Yeah maybe it was misleading. I will use Keith suggestion, which is pretty clear and descriptive.

> Their values are collected at the beginning of the reconciliation when the `KafkaCluster` instance is created.

Author: I am referring to what the `KafkaClusterCreator` does when creates the `KafkaCluster` instance and fills the added and removed nodes lists.

> Their values are collected at the beginning of the reconciliation when the `KafkaCluster` instance is created.

Reviewer: Maybe you should make it more clear ... e.g. the node being added/removed are pro vided by the KafkaClusterCreator and stored within the KafkaAsemblyOperator for later use in the auto-rebalancing.

3. On the **Nth** reconciliation (rebalancing is done):
   * the `podSet()` does nothing because no new brokers are added this time.
   * the `KafkaAutorebalancingReconciler().reconcile()` detects that the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource status reports the `Ready` state (so the rebalancing is completed). The end of rebalancing is reflected into the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` field and the `KafkaRebalance` is deleted.

Because the rebalancing runs across several reconciliations, different scenarios could happen even taking into account operator restarts:

* the `KafkaCluster.addedNodes()` list is empty:
  * the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` is at `RebalancingOnScaleUp`. It's the normal flow, so just checking the rebalancing state.
  * the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` doesn't exist or it's `Ready`. It means no scale up requested. Nothing to do in terms of rebalancing.
* the `KafkaCluster.addNodes()` list is not empty:
  * the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` doesn't exist or it's `Ready`. It's the normal flow, a new rebalance has to start.

>   * the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` is at `RebalancingOnScaleUp`. The newly added brokers' IDs are compared with the one in the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes.brokers` field. If they are equal, nothing to do (even if this situation should not be possible). If they are different, the user could have asked for another scale up right after a previous one. The operator has to stop the current rebalancing, by applying the `strimzi.io/rebalance: stop` annotation on the corresponding `KafkaRebalance` custom resource, and start a new rebalancing, by applying the `strimzi.io/rebalance: refresh` annotation, with a consistent list of brokers defined by the multiple requested scales up.

Reviewer: Will this be synchronous or asynchronous? I assume it has to be async because the KafkaRebalanceAssmeblyOperator now also works in 2 minute beat for synchronous would block the rebalance cancelation for a long time. But if it is async, how will it work?

Author: Yeah, stopping and refreshing adds complexity but I just double checked, we support `refresh` during `PendingProposal` and `Rebalancing` states so no need to stop, it's done automatically.
So we can change here about using the `strimzi.io/rebalance: refresh` annotation directly which triggers the stop and a new request in one reconciliation (which starts immediately because of the rebalance custom resource change).

>   * the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` is at `RebalancingOnScaleUp`. The newly added brokers' IDs are compared with the one in the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes.brokers` field. If they are equal, nothing to do (even if this situation should not be possible). If they are different, the user could have asked for another scale up right after a previous one. The operator has to stop the current rebalancing, by applying the `strimzi.io/rebalance: stop` annotation on the corresponding `KafkaRebalance` custom resource, and start a new rebalancing, by applying the `strimzi.io/rebalance: refresh` annotation, with a consistent list of brokers defined by the multiple requested scales up.

Reviewer: What if a scale-down happens here?

During the above flow, errors can happen after the scaling up:

* There is an error when getting the proposal.
* After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

> In both scenarios, the reconciliation ends with the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource in the `NotReady` state which is reflected into the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` field.

Reviewer: Again the `NotReady` state was not covered before when you introduced the API.

On the next reconciliation, the scaling up is done already, but the rebalancing cannot run because of the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource in the `NotReady` state.

> The user can fix it by deleting the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource so that on the next reconciliation, the operator will be able to retry an auto-rebalancing, by recreating a new `KafkaRebalance` custom resource getting the added brokers from the `status.autoRebalancing.brokers` for the `add-brokers` mode.

Reviewer: Will you remove the finalizer at some point here?

Author: I have mentioned the finalizer removal some paragraphs before when I am talking about finalizer being used in general. If needed I will add here as well revisiting the paragraph.

Reviewer: The problem here is that you suggest that the user will go and delete the resource. So yes, I think you should clarify if the user is expected to handle the finalizer or if it will be removed at this point by the operator.

> The user can fix it by deleting the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource so that on the next reconciliation, the operator will be able to retry an auto-rebalancing, by recreating a new `KafkaRebalance` custom resource getting the added brokers from the `status.autoRebalancing.brokers` for the `add-brokers` mode.

Reviewer: What if there is another scale-up and you have the resource still existing with the NotReady state?

> Another approach the user can take is removing the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` (other than deleting the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource) in order to run a manual rebalancing later on.

Reviewer: This one seems super weird. But I'm not sure I have a better idea how the user can tell the operator to just give up. Should we maybe approach it differently? When the scale rebalance fails, you reset the add brokers in the status to not continue the rebalance for these brokers and the user completes it manually?

### Auto-rebalancing on scaling down

The following flow is triggered when the user decreases the `replicas` field within a `Kafka` or `KafkaNodePool` custom resource in order to scale down the cluster by removing brokers.

1. On the **1st** reconciliation (scaling down is skipped, rebalancing started):
     * the check on scaling down the cluster fails, and it reverts the `replicas` back only in memory but not on the `Kafka` custom resource. The brokers to be removed are collected (for the auto-rebalancing mechanism) in a dedicate `removedNodes` list.

>      * the `scaleDown()` method skips doing the scale down because the check failed and rebalancing is needed first.

Reviewer: This might be misleading -> it will never know about the scale-down in the first place.

3. On the **Nth** reconciliation (rebalancing id done, scaling down can start):
     * the check on scaling down the cluster doesn't fail, because the auto-rebalancing was completed and the brokers to be removed don't host any topics' partitions anymore.
     * the `scaleDown()` method can run the scaling down.
     * the `KafkaAutorebalancingReconciler().reconcile()` detects that the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource status reports the `Ready` state (so the rebalancing is completed). The end of rebalancing is reflected into the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` field and the `KafkaRebalance` is deleted.

Because the rebalancing runs across several reconciliations, different scenarios could happen even taking into account operator restarts:

* the `removedNodes` list is empty:
  * it means no scale down requested. Nothing to do in terms of rebalancing.
* the `removedNodes` list is not empty:
  * the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` doesn't exist or it's `Ready`. It's the normal flow, a new rebalance has to start.

>   * the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` is at `RebalancingOnScaleDown`. The removed brokers' IDs are compared with the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes.brokers` field. If they are equal, it's the normal flow, so just checking the rebalancing state. If they are different, the user could have asked for another scale down right after a previous one. The operator has to stop the current rebalancing, by applying the `strimzi.io/rebalance: stop` annotation on the corresponding `KafkaRebalance` custom resource, and start a new rebalancing, by applying the `strimzi.io/rebalance: refresh` annotation, with a consistent list of brokers defined by the multiple requested scales down.

Reviewer: It is missing what to do if scale-up happens.

During the above flow, errors can happen before the scaling down:

* There is an error when getting the proposal.
* After auto-approving the proposal, there is an error when running the rebalance.

In both scenarios, the reconciliation ends with the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource in the `NotReady` state which is reflected into the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` field.

The reconcile ends but the scale down cannot proceed because the brokers to be removed are still hosting some partition replicas.
On the next reconciliation, the cluster operator will try to do a scale down again, so going through the same flow.
The scale down check fails but the rebalancing cannot run because of the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource in the `NotReady` state.
The user can fix it by deleting the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource so that on the next reconciliation, the operator will be able to retry an auto-rebalancing, by recreating a new `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.

> Another approach the user can take is removing the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` (other than deleting the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource) in order to run a manual rebalancing later on.

Reviewer: What happens if the rebalance failed, but the scaledown is not needed anymore (was reverted by the user or the rebalance was done out-of-band)? Will the operator detect that this NotReady rebalance is not needed anymore and reset itself?

## Motivation

The rebalancing operation during scaling up and down is a manual two-step process:

* Scaling up: 
   1. Scaling the cluster up by adding brokers
   2. Running a rebalance
* Scaling down: 
   1. Running a rebalance
   2. Scaling the cluster down by removing brokers

In order to simplify the process, it would be great for the user to deal with just scaling the cluster and then having the operator taking care of running a rebalancing operation automatically when needed.

## Proposal

This proposal is about providing the user the possibility to automatically run a rebalancing when they scale the cluster up (by adding brokers) or scale the cluster down (by removing brokers) by changing the `spec.replicas` within a `Kafka` or `KafkaNodePool` custom resource.

### Extending the `Kafka.spec.cruiseControl` field with auto-rebalancing related configuration

The `Kafka` custom resource is extended by adding a new `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` field.
By default, without such field, no auto-rebalancing runs on scaling.

The `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` field allows to specify a list of rebalancing modes with the corresponding configuration to be used.

> For each entry in the list, the mode is defined by the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field (`add-brokers` or `remove-brokers`) and the corresponding rebalancing configuration is defined as a reference to a "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource (read later for more details), by using the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.config` field as a [LocalObjectReference](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/common-definitions/local-object-reference/).

Reviewer: In the YAML example below, you do not use `LocalObjectReferece`. If you did, it would IMHO look like this:

```yaml
      - mode: add-brokers
        config: 
          name: my-add-remove-brokers-rebalancing-config
```

I'm fine with the current API, but I can live with using the actual `LocalObjectReferece` as well. We just should decide for one or another.

Author: I was for the standard Kubernetes way of using `LocalObjectReferece` so I will change the YAML. You are right.

This field is optional and if not specified, the auto-rebalancing runs with the default Cruise Control configuration.

In the following example, a user can decide to use the same rebalancing configuration when adding or removing brokers.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    # ...
    autoRebalance:
      # using the same rebalancing configuration when adding or removing brokers
      - mode: add-brokers

>         config: my-add-remove-brokers-rebalancing-config

Reviewer: Would it make sense to call it `template` instead of `config` now when it points to the `template` Kafka Rebalance?

Author: Agree. It was in my mind for long time. Good you raised it, I forgot :-D

      # using specific configuration when adding brokers
      - mode: add-brokers
        config: my-add-brokers-rebalancing-config
      # using different configuration when removing brokers  
      - mode: remove-brokers
        config: my-remove-brokers-rebalancing-config
```

The user could even decide to have auto-rebalancing only when adding or removing brokers but not for both.
This way provides the greatest flexibility to describe in which case to run the auto-rebalancing and with which configuration.

The auto-rebalance configuration for the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.config` property in the `Kafka` custom resource is provided through a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource defined as a "template".
That is a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource with the `strimzi.io/rebalance: template` annotation set.
When it is created, the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` doesn't run any rebalancing.
This is because it doesn't represent an "actual" rebalance request to get an optimization proposal, but it's just the place where configuration related to auto-rebalancing is defined.
The user can specify rebalancing goals and options, such as `skipHardGoalCheck`, within the resource.

> When such a "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource is referenced by the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.config` field for one or more modes, the operator asks to Cruise Control for an optimization proposal with such configuration.

Author: Sorry I didn't get what you mean :-(

> When such a "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource is referenced by the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.config` field for one or more modes, the operator asks to Cruise Control for an optimization proposal with such configuration.

Reviewer 2: As it is written, it looks like a soon as I create the template reference in Kafka CR, then a Rebalance CR is created to get an optimization proposal from CC. I think there must also be a scale event (replicas update) for that to happen, right?

> When such a "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource is referenced by the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.config` field for one or more modes, the operator asks to Cruise Control for an optimization proposal with such configuration.

Author: The sentence says " ... is referenced by ... " not " ... is created ...". Anyway I added "when scaling up/down happens" at the end of the sentence to make it clearer.

They could define different goals based on the status of the Kafka cluster or skip hard goals in some scenarios for example.
As already mentioned, specifying goals but more in general customizing the optimization proposal request is already possible in the current usage of a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource so it should be allowed for the auto-rebalancing as well.

The idea of using a "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource could be also extended to the manual rebalancing operations started by the user when they create a new `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.
It would mean a change on the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource by adding a new `spec.config` field to reference the rebalancing "template" and deprecating all the other fields used today (i.e. `spec.goals`, ...).
Another option could be leaving both the ways living together.
If this proposal is considered valid, doing such a change on the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource would help the proposal itself because the operator should not copy over the entire configuration from the "template" resource to the actual rebalance resource but just set the configuration reference.

> Of course, such a change would need a different proposal to be approved before this one.

Author: This was an idea which I put here to understand how much it was of interest but it would need a different proposal. We could even decide to not have it now but later on. Not sure why a different paragraph is needed.

Both the operations involve the `StrimziPodSet` controller which takes care of adding (scale up) or removing (scale down) pods by communicating with the Kubernetes API.

The scaling up is triggered within the `KafkaReconciler.reconcile()` method by the `podSet()` call which updates the involved `StrimziPodSet`(s) so that the corresponding controller will take care of spinning up the newly added brokers.
The scaling operation ends during the same reconciliation, because after having the `StrimziPodSet` controller asking for new pods through the Kubernetes API, the subsequent calls to `podsReady()`, `serviceEndpointReady()` and `headlessServiceEndpointReady()` are waiting for the newly added pods, together with the corresponding services, to be ready.
It means that the auto-rebalancing can start in the same reconciliation, being sure that the newly added pods are available for the upcoming rebalancing operation.
Of course, the rebalancing will take time going through several reconciliations.

> For the scaling down, if the brokers to be removed are hosting topics' partitions, the operation is reverted before calling the `KafkaReconciler.reconcile()` method which is called with the original replicas count as if the cluster was never scaled down.
> If the brokers to be removed are not hosting any topics' partitions, the `KafkaReconciler.reconcile()` method will be called with the new replicas count and the scaling down is triggered by the `scaleDown()` call which updates the involved `StrimziPodSet`(s) so that the corresponding controller will take care of removing the brokers.
> In this case, the auto-rebalancing can start in the same reconciliation to take topics' partitions off but going through several reconciliations.
> When the auto-rebalancing ends, the triggered pods deletion takes some time but it doesn't have any impact on the rebalancing already done.
> Of course, if the scale down check doesn't fail, it means that no topics' partitions are hosted on the brokers to be removed and no auto-rebalancing is needed.

Reviewer: This seems badly ordered?

```suggestion
For the scaling down, if the brokers to be removed are hosting topics' partitions, the operation is reverted before calling the `KafkaReconciler.reconcile()` method which is called with the original replicas count as if the cluster was never scaled down.
In this case, the auto-rebalancing can start in the same reconciliation to take topics' partitions off but going through several reconciliations.
When the auto-rebalancing ends, the triggered pods deletion takes some time but it doesn't have any impact on the rebalancing already done.

If the brokers to be removed are not hosting any topics' partitions, the `KafkaReconciler.reconcile()` method will be called with the new replicas count and the scaling down is triggered by the `scaleDown()` call which updates the involved `StrimziPodSet`(s) so that the corresponding controller will take care of removing the brokers.
Of course, if the scale down check doesn't fail, it means that no topics' partitions are hosted on the brokers to be removed and no auto-rebalancing is needed.
```

Author: good catch!

> The idea is about having a new `KafkaAutoRebalancingReconciler` class with its own `reconcile()` method which is called by the `KafkaAssemblyOperator` as one of the last steps in the reconciliation loop, so that:

Reviewer: It is not _just_ an idea ... it is what you are proposing, or? 😉

* we can get all the information about the brokers removed or added, which are available through the `KafkaClusterCreator` class (read later for more details).
* we are sure that, in case of scaling up, the Cruise Control pod was restarted and it's now up and running again so it can accept new rebalancing requests.
Of course the `KafkaAutoRebalancingReconciler.reconcile()` method also checks the status of an ongoing rebalancing across several reconciliations.

It's also important taking into account that a user, by using `KafkaNodePool`(s), could remove and add brokers at the same time, so actually triggering both scaling down and up.
In terms of scaling, the reconcile loop has the scale down triggered before the scaling up but it could be skipped because the brokers to be removed are still hosting topics' partitions. In such case the scaling up runs before.

> In terms of rebalancing, after the scaling up happens, the rebalancing for brokers to be removed takes the precedence on the rebalancing for newly added brokers. They are executed sequentially and not in parallel.

Author: The other way around will take more reconciliations (so more time). Let's take the following as an example ...
Cluster with brokers 0,1,2,3,4,5 ... user wants to remove 2,3 and add 6,7.
Doing the current approach (rebalance scale down first, rebalance scale up later):

- rebalance scale down, move partitions off brokers 2,3
- 2,3 removed (because we are sure they are empty), scales up 6,7 and rebalance scale up to 6,7

Doing the other way around:

- scale up 6,7 rebalance scale up to 6,7 (some partitions from 2,3 could be moved to 6,7 but 2,3 could still host others)
- rebalance scale down, move remaining partitions off brokers 2,3
- 2, 3 removed

Each step is one reconciliation or a group of reconciliations, depending on how long is the rebalancing. Anyway it shows the opposite order will take longer.

> In terms of rebalancing, after the scaling up happens, the rebalancing for brokers to be removed takes the precedence on the rebalancing for newly added brokers. They are executed sequentially and not in parallel.

Reviewer 2: You never know how long a rebalance would take, as there may be other tasks in the CC queue scheduled before that, but my point was about HA. Doing the scale down first, you run the cluster with less nodes, and a single node crash may cause under replicated partitions. This risk is much lower if you run the scale up rebalancing first.

> In terms of rebalancing, after the scaling up happens, the rebalancing for brokers to be removed takes the precedence on the rebalancing for newly added brokers. They are executed sequentially and not in parallel.

Author: But makes everything more complex imho. I would not change the algorithm for now. It's already complex by itself :-)

> In terms of rebalancing, after the scaling up happens, the rebalancing for brokers to be removed takes the precedence on the rebalancing for newly added brokers. They are executed sequentially and not in parallel.

Reviewer: @fvaleri As far as I understood, it does not change the replication factor or anything. So I do not think it impacts HA. It will still have the same exposure to node failure as before. It also seems to me as if you are mixing two different events -> the scale-up (i.e. adding new nodes) and the scale-up rebalance (i.e. doing the rebalance for the empty nodes). 

If you for example scale one node pool from 6 nodes to 3 and in the same reconciliation add another node-pool with 3 nodes what will happen is the following:
* The scale-down will be initially reverted due to non-empty nodes
* The scale-up (new node pool) will be done and the new nodes will be added
* The auto-rebalancing as proposed would trigger the remove-nodes rebalance with the new nodes being there.
* => Not sure Cruise Control is smart enough to say "I'm removing these 3 nodes and here are my 3 brand new completely empty nodes, let's just move the data between them". But I guess some part of the data from the nodes that will be removed will go to the new nodes anyway regardless what Paolo does first.
 
I think that in the best case, if CC is smart enough, Paolos's approach does both with one rebalance and is better. In the worst case, if CC is not that smart, the amount of data movement would and time spent in summary should be IMHO roughly the same regardless of what goes first.

In reality, it is likely the scale-up and scale-down will be in most cases separate events (because you change two different node pools which generates two separate events) and the priority will not matter much and it will depend on which part you did first.

(@ppatierno That said, what happens if I have topics with RF=3 and try to scale down to 2 nodes? Does CC give us some reasonable error handling?)

> In terms of rebalancing, after the scaling up happens, the rebalancing for brokers to be removed takes the precedence on the rebalancing for newly added brokers. They are executed sequentially and not in parallel.

Author: > That said, what happens if I have topics with RF=3 and try to scale down to 2 nodes? Does CC give us some reasonable error handling?

I guess it would depend on the goals you set? With the default ones having `RackAwareGoal` as hard goal by default I get:

```shell
Error processing POST request '/remove_broker' due to: 'com.linkedin.kafka.cruisecontrol.exception.OptimizationFailureException: [RackAwareGoal] Insufficient number of racks to distribute each replica (Current: 2, Needed: 3). Add at least 1 rack with brokers. Add at least 1 rack with brokers.'.
java.util.concurrent.ExecutionException: com.linkedin.kafka.cruisecontrol.exception.OptimizationFailureException: [RackAwareGoal] Insufficient number of racks to distribute each replica (Current: 2, Needed: 3). Add at least 1 rack with brokers. Add at least 1 rack with brokers.
```

(I just tested on my minikube instance).

> In terms of rebalancing, after the scaling up happens, the rebalancing for brokers to be removed takes the precedence on the rebalancing for newly added brokers. They are executed sequentially and not in parallel.

Reviewer: Well, no rebalance should work for your on Minikube with RackAware goal, or?

> In terms of rebalancing, after the scaling up happens, the rebalancing for brokers to be removed takes the precedence on the rebalancing for newly added brokers. They are executed sequentially and not in parallel.

Author: Yeah in this case you are right but even not having the rackaware goal it says cannot move replica `Add at least 1 broker` so we are covered.

> In terms of rebalancing, after the scaling up happens, the rebalancing for brokers to be removed takes the precedence on the rebalancing for newly added brokers. They are executed sequentially and not in parallel.

Reviewer: Great, thanks.

### Auto-rebalancing Finite State Machine (FSM)

The auto-rebalancing mechanism runs through a Finite State Machine (FSM) made by the following states:

> * **Idle**: Initial state with a new auto-rebalancing going to run because scaling down/up operations were requested. This is also the ending state after an auto-rebalancing completed successfully or failed.

Reviewer: Will the `autoRebalance` in the Kafka CR status list the `Idle` state? Or will it be not present in the status and just handled as default?

Reviewer: So, will the `Idle` state be removed after one reconciliation? It seems quite strange to have it not set on the beginning and always set afterwards to be honest.

Author: We could have it since the beginning, which would mean set it at the beginning of the reconciliation? But doesn't it trigger another reconciliation? Anyway, I would expect being immediately update to the next state, something like `RebalanceOnScaleXXX` at the end of the reconciliation when a rebalancing starts.

Reviewer: Yeah, I think it would be more natural to set it there from the beginning. Or maybe even better from my perspective would be to not add the Idle state there at all and simply remove the field. But if that is a problem, having it there by default even before scaling makes more sense to me.

Author: Agreed. I will make clear it's set since the beginning.

  * **RebalanceOnScaleUp**: if a scale down operation was requested together with a scale up and, because they run sequentially, the rebalance on scale down had the precedence, was executed first and completed successfully. We can now move on with rebalancing for the scale up.
  * **Idle**: if only a scale down operation was requested, it was executed and completed successfully or failed.
* from **RebalanceOnScaleUp**:
  * **RebalanceOnScaleUp**: if a rebalancing on scale up is still running or another one was requested while the first one ended. 
  * **RebalanceOnScaleDown**: if a scale down operation was requested, so the current rebalancing scale up is stopped (and queued) and a new rebalancing scale down is started. The rebalancing scale up will be postponed.
  * **Idle**: if a scale up operation was requested, it was executed and completed successfully or failed.

On each reconciliation, the logic will be like this:

1. The `KafkaClusterCreator` creates the `KafkaCluster` instance and it includes:

   * checking the scale down (if brokers cannot be removed because they host topics' partitions) and reverting replicas count if it fails.

>    * collecting removed (scale down) and added nodes (scale up). Let's call these lists as `removedNodes` and `addedNodes`.

Reviewer: I assume you understand it well, but I think the way it is written is not completely clear -> you really case only about the reverted scale-down nodes. Not about the node passed for scaledown.

```suggestion
   * collecting the nodes reverted from scale-down (scale down) and the nodes added by scale up. Let's call these lists as `toBeRemovedNodes` and `addedNodes`.
```

Author: Yeah good suggestion, thanks.

2. The `KafkaReconciler.scaleDown()` scales the cluster down if the check didn't fail, or isn't aware of any scale down at all because it was just reverted within the `KafkaClusterCreator`.

3. The `KafkaReconciler.podSet()` scales the cluster up with the newly added brokers being ready, together with all the corresponding services, before starting an auto-rebalancing.

> 4. The `KafkaAutoRebalancingReconciler.reconcile()` being involved and using the FSM to run rebalancing operations, if requested and in the following order:

Reviewer: Is it worth adding the CC rolling update in between these points?

* `modes`: enabled modes (`remove-brokers` and/or `add-brokers`) with corresponding brokers lists if an auto-rebalancing requested.
* `error`: error message if a previous auto-rebalancing failed.

The FSM is initialized based on the `state` field.

The `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[add-brokers|remove-brokers].brokers` list is filled or updated based on its current content and what's coming from `removeNodes` and `addedNodes`.

Check the `removeNodes`:

  * if empty
    * no further action and stay with the current `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[remove-brokers].brokers` list (which could mean being empty/not existing too).
  * if not empty
    * update the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[remove-brokers].brokers` by producing a consistent list with its current content and what is in the `removeNodes` list. This cover the case that while rebalancing scale down running, the user requests an update on an already running one.

Check the `addedNodes`:

  * if empty
    * no further action and stay with the current `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[add-brokers].brokers` list (which could mean being empty/not existing too)
  * if not empty

>     * update the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[add-brokers].brokers` by producing a consistent list with its current content and what is in the `addedNodes` list. This cover the case that while rebalancing scale down running, the user requests a new scale up or an update on an already queued one. Or even the case that while rebalancing scale up running, the user requests an update on an already running one.

Reviewer: I think this is correct only for the Idle state. For the other states, you should first check the state of the ongoing rebalance and if it is complete, clear the existing add or remove brokers, or? Otherwise you might just add and add more nodes into the lists and never clear them.

Also, do you really combine the lists for the removed nodes? I would assume you always take only the new list as you essentially don't care what cleaned the node, but if it is not in the reverted scaledown nodes, you don't care about it anymore, or?

Reviewer: > Well if you are in RebalanceOnScaleDown and the user asked already for scale up, but it's scaling up more

Yes, here you just add the nodes to the list because the list is waiting for scale-up rebalance

> if you are in RebalanceOnScaleUp and the user requested more scale up

I think in this case, ideally you want to check if the ongoing rebelance isn't already complete. If it is, you would remove the already rebalanced nodes from the list and only then add the new nodes. But maybe it is too little gain with too much added complexity?

Author: > But maybe it is too little gain with too much added complexity?

Exactly. I see your point but just stopping and requesting a new rebalancing with the updated list is simpler. We should also expect that the new rebalancing is going to be faster because the previously added nodes were already part of a rebalancing before and filled with partitions.

During the FSM processing, the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[add-brokers|remove-brokers].brokers` list is compared with the corresponding `KafkaRebalance.spec.brokers` list for the current rebalancing to determine if there were changes.
Those changes could mean several use cases: a new scale down/up requested while another one is running, a scale up requested while a scale down is running and so on.

Let's see what happens during the auto-rebalancing process when the FSM starts from a specific state and depending on the brokers list updates.
Remember that starting a rebalancing always means creating a corresponding "actual" `KafkaRebalance` customer resource from the "template" one and applying the `strimzi.io/rebalance-auto-approval: true` annotation.

#### Idle

This is when `Kafka.status.autoRebalance` is empty or `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state` is `Idle` because of a previous successfully completed or failed auto-rebalancing.
If failed, the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state.error` contains an error message.

From this state:

* if the previous auto-rebalancing was completed successfully, the user can trigger a new auto-rebalancing by scaling down/up the cluster again.

> * if the previous auto-rebalancing failed, the user has to deal with the rebalancing on their own (with the usual `KafkaRebalance` custom resource manual creation). If they are not interested to fix it manually, on the next scaling down/up the cluster, the auto-rebalancing process will be triggered again, cleaning the error.

Reviewer: This seems a bit fishy. It sounds like the state would:
* either disappear right in the next reconciliation (in which case should we just rely on logging) 
* or it will be there until the next auto-rebalance
* or in the worse case it will trigger the auto-rebalance again and again for already completed nodes?

Author: > either disappear right in the next reconciliation (in which case should we just rely on logging)

Yeah. When I say "on the next scaling down/up the cluster, the auto-rebalancing process will be triggered again, cleaning the error", it could easily happen automatically on the next reconciliation due to a scale down (because the scale up won't trigger again, pods are running already). And in case of more errors this could trigger the loop (as your third point).

I guess that at this point the only easy solution is leaving the user to deal with the error? The autorebalance status could stay in error there (even forever) just to show that last rebalancing failed but on next reconciliation the FSM (because of the error) would not handle a new autorebalancing (this would stop the infinite triggering). The question what's the best UX for the user to clear this error, to be sure that in a future scale up/down, the autorebalancing is processed? If they go the manual way, the rebalance is successful and the related scale as well, how to unlock the operator for a future new autorebalancing?

Reviewer: My take is that there is no perfect option. I would probably treat the status here as internal only and have the users to rely on logs only? That way, you can simple clear it on error and be done with it. If you don't clear it, it will IMHO be too chaotic:
* You will need to know what to ignore when next auto-rebalance is needed
* But that means It is not a reliable source of information for the user because next auto-rebalance event would wipe the status anyway
* The scaling might be a rare event ... I'm not completely comfortable with some scale-up rebalance error being in the status several years after it happened because that was the last scaling.
* For scale-down, the non-empty nodes will still be there so a new scale-won will be triggered again after few seconds. So the error again does not have much value for the user and logs will be the way to go..

Should we consider storing this in some ConfigMap instead of in `.status` to make it more clear it is internal information only? I'm fine with it in the status, but this would _hide_ it from the user if we would think it would be too confusing to have in the status but mostly as internal information only.

Author: I would prefer having the info in the `Kafka.status` because this is the usual UX we provide to users to check what's up with the Kafka cluster. Also, it would provide information during the rebalancing about what's happening and which brokers are involved. On the other hand, the user could also take a look on the corresponding `KafkaRebalance` resource to know how things are going.
Now, if we wipe out the status when the rebalancing ends with error, how the user is supposed to know that there was a problem? For scale down, user should see the scaling being blocked but for scale up there is no way to know that the subsequent rebalance failed. At the same time, taking the Idle state and the error there could drive the issues you mention. Of course, as said before a way would be looking at the `KafkaRebalance` resource.

Another point related to this would be ... who should delete the `KafkaRebalance` resource at the end of the rebalancing (completed or failed)? The user or the operator? Leaving it at the user would allow him to have a place where errors could be checked? If done the operator, there is really no way for the user to know how rebalancing went.

Reviewer: Yeah, but ... as I said ...
* You need to remove the error at some point. You do not want to keep it forever as scaling events might be rare
* For scale-down, you would trigger another right away and anyway override the error message

So I'm not sure this works for informing users and IMHO you still need to rely on the regular log.

Author: > For scale-down, you would trigger another right away and anyway override the error message

Thinking more maybe this is not true. The FSM could avoid starting a new rebalancing if the state is `Idle` and the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.state.error` field is filled. It's waiting for the user to "clean/reset". The problem is what's the best UX for doing this? The user should delete the `KafkaRebalance` for example? Or what if the user thinks "ok don't do any autorebalance anymore, I will take care of it manually".

Reviewer: I think that just over complicates it. You need to figure out how the user would _reset it_ and make sure the user knows that they have to reset it. And until then it will be blocked just collecting scaling up and down events. I don't think that makes sense as a workflow but it likely also adds a lot complexity? To me it makes more sense to rely on logs and possibly some metrics

Author: We are on the same page, I see all these difficulties but what's not clear to me in your comment is how you envisage the way for the operator to figure out that it has to stop auto rebalancing on next reconciliation, mostly in case of scale down where nodes to remove are still there, the Kafka.spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance is still there and it injects the mechanism to start if the status is wiped out/empty at the beginning of the next reconciliation.

Reviewer: For scale down, it will essentially never stop ....
* User requests the scale down
* Operator blocks it
* Auto-rebalance to remove the nodes is triggered
* ...
* Auto-rebalance fails, you log the error, delete the `KafkaRebalance` resource
* Next reconciliation starts
* The nodes are still requested for scale-down and still blocked
* You trigger another auto-rebalance to remove them
* ...
* This way it proceeds either until it succeeds (it the error was something temporary) or until the user handles the issue 🤷 

For scale-up, this would be different I guess ...
* User requests scale-uo
* Operator adds the nodes
* Auto-rebalance to add the nodes is triggered
* ...
* Auto-rebalance fails, you log the error, delete the `KafkaRebalance` resource ... and forget it

That would be how I would consider handling it.

----

I think recovering from the scale-up rebalance failure would be much harder ... are the nodes still there? Is the scale-up still needed? I think you would easily get lost in the various combinations and would need to rely on the user to take an action that is not obvious. So I'm not sure it is worth it.

For scale-down, it is much easier because you always care only about the nodes for which the scale-down was reverted. So you can easily recover if the error is temporary. And if the error is permanent, the nodes will be still there which makes it much more likely that the user will jump in and fix it.

Author: Of course, this approach is the easier one I would say but I can't see any which is more user friendly. The only thing which is bothering me is that we leave the user no idea what's going on in terms of autorebalancing in the Kafka CR status but just log messages (even because we delete the `KafkaRebalance` which remains the last source of truth for any error). For now I am going to update the proposal this way and see what the others think, if someone comes with a better approach. Thanks!

Reviewer: Yeah, I do not think it is more user friendly. But I think it is not significantly less user friendly and is easier to code.

This field is optional and if not specified, the auto-rebalancing runs with the default Cruise Control configuration.

In the following example, a user can decide to use the same rebalancing configuration when adding or removing brokers.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    # ...
    autoRebalance:
      # using the same rebalancing configuration when adding or removing brokers
      - mode: add-brokers
        template:
          name: my-add-remove-brokers-rebalancing-template
      - mode: remove-brokers
        template:
          name: my-add-remove-brokers-rebalancing-template
```

Furthermore, it is possible to use the default Cruise Control rebalancing configuration by omitting the corresponding field.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    # ...
    autoRebalance:
      # using the default Cruise Control rebalancing configuration when adding or removing brokers
      - mode: add-brokers

>       - mode: remove-brokers

Reviewer 2: What about applying the same logic for a config like `autoRebalance: {}`?

Author: I think it's a bit different. If your `KafkaRebalance.spec` is `{ }` you are implicitly specifying a `full` rebalancing with default CC config. Here you would specify all available modes with CC default. But then just a missing mode what would mean? I think that as we went for disabled by default and you need to specify modes, it's better to be explicit same way here.

Reviewer 2: > But then just a missing mode what would mean?

Would mean the same: defaults are applied for the missing mode with an info level message. TBH, I don't see why one would need "add" but not "remove" or vice versa. Instead I see the need to have different rebalance setup for "add" and "remove".

When possible, I see a lot of value in having a simpler configuration.

Author: > Would mean the same: defaults are applied for the missing mode with an info level message

No because, missing mode means ... no mode activated. It's disabled by default.

Reviewer 2: Sorry if I insist, but I would like to understand what's the use case to enable only one mode.

Author: I think it's just a matter of giving freedom. Also, while autorebalancing on scale down is kind of mandatory to scale, for scale up maybe user would use the new brokers just for new topics and not having the autorebalancing since the beginning. I don't want to be too strict, we don't know how users are going to use this new feature.

Reviewer 2: Ok, this makes sense, can you please add to the proposal?

Author: I added it. A few lines below, after the latest example.

```

The user can even decide to use a different configuration when adding or removing brokers.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    replicas: 3
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    # ...
    autoRebalance:
      # using specific configuration when adding brokers
      - mode: add-brokers
        template: 
          name: my-add-brokers-rebalancing-template
      # using different configuration when removing brokers  
      - mode: remove-brokers
        template: 
          name: my-remove-brokers-rebalancing-template
```

The user could even decide to have auto-rebalancing only when adding or removing brokers but not for both.
This way provides the greatest flexibility to describe in which case to run the auto-rebalancing and with which configuration.

The auto-rebalance configuration for the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.template` property in the `Kafka` custom resource is provided through a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource defined as a "template".
That is a `KafkaRebalance` custom resource with the `strimzi.io/rebalance: template` annotation set.

> When it is created, the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` doesn't run any rebalancing.

Author: It won't have any status at all, because it doesn't represent any rebalance process going on.

> When it is created, the `KafkaRebalanceAssemblyOperator` doesn't run any rebalancing.

Reviewer 5: Okay, cool, I was just curious if it will have something there or not. Thanks

If the `mode` and `brokers` fields are set, they will be just ignored because the resource doesn't represent an "actual" rebalancing.
Even the `rebalanceDisk` field will be ignored because it doesn't make sense to run an intra-broker related rebalancing on brokers being removed/added.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: my-rebalance-template
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/rebalance: template # specifies that this KafkaRebalance is a rebalance configuration template
spec:
  # NOTE: mode and brokers fields, if set, will be just ignored because they are
  #       automatically set on the corresponding KafkaRebalance by the operator
  goals:
    - CpuCapacityGoal
    - NetworkInboundCapacityGoal
    - DiskCapacityGoal
    - RackAwareGoal
    - MinTopicLeadersPerBrokerGoal
    - NetworkOutboundCapacityGoal
    - ReplicaCapacityGoal
  skipHardGoalCheck: true
  # ... other rebalancing related configuration
```

When the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` is set and a specific rebalancing mode refers to a "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource, the operator checks that it exists in the first place.

> If it doesn't, the operator logs a warning about auto-rebalancing being ignored (as it wasn't set at all) because referring to a non existing "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.

Reviewer 2: We could raise a warning and fallback to use the default Cruise Control rebalancing configuration. Have you considered that?

Author: I don't because just a simple typo on the template name could run an auto-rebalancing with CC default configuration you don't want.

Reviewer 2: Ok, I agree.

This is the reason why the same fields specified in the "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource are ignored.
The "actual" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource will be named as `<my-cluster-name>-auto-rebalancing-<mode>` where the `<my-cluster-name>` part comes from the `metadata.name` in the `Kafka` custom resource, and the `<mode>` is referring to which rebalancing has to run (add or remove brokers).

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: my-cluster-auto-rebalancing-add-brokers
  finalizers:
    - strimzi.io/auto-rebalancing
spec:
  mode: add-brokers
  brokers: [3,4]
  goals:
    - CpuCapacityGoal
    - NetworkInboundCapacityGoal
    - DiskCapacityGoal
    - RackAwareGoal
    - MinTopicLeadersPerBrokerGoal
    - NetworkOutboundCapacityGoal
    - ReplicaCapacityGoal
  skipHardGoalCheck: true
  # ... other rebalancing related configuration
```

The operator also sets a finalizer, named `strimzi.io/auto-rebalancing`, on the "actual" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.

> This is needed to avoid the user, or any other tooling, to delete the resource while the auto-rebalancing is still running.

Reviewer 2: What if the actual Rebalance is deleted despite the finalizer? This can be done when the operator is not running. When the operator restarts, I guess we need to reset the auto rebalance to idle state and try again, as you don't know the outcome of that Rebalance.

Author: > What if the actual Rebalance is deleted despite the finalizer? This can be done when the operator is not running

Not sure Kubernetes works this way but I could be wrong. If you have a finalizer, it doesn't matter if the component which set the finalizer is running or not (the operator in this case), you cannot delete the custom resource. I assume you can force removing the finalizer and then deleting the resource, but you are doing something like this on purpose, so you deserve the process not working anymore imho. We can't fight with all corner cases made by (stupid) users.

Said that what I can do is that on the reconciliation, if when checking the `KafkaRebalance` status for an ongoing rebalancing, the operator detects that it's missing, the autorebalance state machine moves to `NotReady`. From there, it's all in the user hands as already discussed with @scholzj which seems to be the best solution given there is nothing more we can do.

Author: > It's the operator that sets the finalizer, and if it's not running nobody re-adds the finalizer and the resource can be deleted.

From your initial comment you said, the operator is not running anymore and someone delete the `KafkaRebalance`. If the operator is stopped/crashed, no one remove the finalizer. So when user tries to delete the resource, it's not possible to do so because the finilizer is still there. Of course, there should be a way to force deletion but it would be you to put yourself in trouble.
So I don't get what your comment about "and if it's not running nobody re-adds the finalizer" ... the finalizer is still there if operator crashes/stopped.

Reviewer 2: I was talking about the evil user, who first stops the operator, and then removes the finalizer by simply editing the resource and deleting that row. I don't know if that's what you mean with "force".

Author: Yeah that was my assumption. If you are deleting a finalizer, for deleting the resource, you should be aware to put yourself in troubles tbh. The finalizer is there for a reason ... to avoid the resource being deleted when it should not be and you are forcing that limit. So I don't expect we helping you.

## Proposal

This proposal is about providing the user the possibility to automatically run a rebalancing when they scale the cluster up (by adding brokers) or scale the cluster down (by removing brokers) by changing the `spec.replicas` within a `Kafka` or `KafkaNodePool` custom resource.

### Extending the `Kafka.spec.cruiseControl` field with auto-rebalancing related configuration

The `Kafka` custom resource is extended by adding a new `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` field.
By default, without such field, no auto-rebalancing runs on scaling.

The `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` field allows to specify a list of rebalancing modes with the corresponding configuration to be used.
For each entry in the list, the mode is defined by the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field (`add-brokers` or `remove-brokers`) and the corresponding rebalancing configuration is defined as a reference to a "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource (read later for more details), by using the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.template` field as a [LocalObjectReference](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/common-definitions/local-object-reference/).

> This field is optional and if not specified, the auto-rebalancing runs with the default Cruise Control configuration.

Reviewer 6: do we need to say something about the results of running the default config?

Author: wdym by "the results of running the default config"? It's going to use what's mentioned here https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/deploying#default-goals

  skipHardGoalCheck: true
  # ... other rebalancing related configuration
```

When the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance` is set and a specific rebalancing mode refers to a "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource, the operator checks that it exists in the first place.
If it doesn't, the operator logs a warning about auto-rebalancing being ignored (as it wasn't set at all) because referring to a non existing "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.
In this case, the scaling process proceeds as usual: the scale up just runs (without any following rebalance) while the scale down could be blocked (because no rebalance ran to get topics' partitions off the brokers to remove).

If the referenced "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource exists, the operator automatically creates (or updates) a corresponding `KafkaRebalance` custom resource when the user scales the cluster, by adding and/or removing brokers.
The operator copies over goals and rebalancing options from the referenced "template" resource to the "actual" rebalancing one and also adds the `spec.mode` and `spec.brokers` to it, based on the scaling operation the user asked for and on which brokers.

> This is the reason way the same fields specified in the "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource are ignored.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This is the reason why the same fields specified in the "template" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource are ignored.
```

* we are sure that, in case of scaling up, the Cruise Control pod was restarted and it's now up and running again so it can accept new rebalancing requests.
Of course the `KafkaAutoRebalancingReconciler.reconcile()` method also checks the status of an ongoing rebalancing across several reconciliations.

It's also important taking into account that a user, by using `KafkaNodePool`(s), could remove and add brokers at the same time, so actually triggering both scaling down and up.
In terms of scaling, the reconcile loop has the scale down triggered before the scaling up but it could be skipped because the brokers to be removed are still hosting topics' partitions. In such case the scaling up runs before.
In terms of rebalancing, after the scaling up happens, the rebalancing for brokers to be removed takes the precedence on the rebalancing for newly added brokers. They are executed sequentially and not in parallel.

### Auto-rebalancing Finite State Machine (FSM)

The auto-rebalancing mechanism runs through a Finite State Machine (FSM) made by the following states:

> * **Idle**: Initial state with a new auto-rebalancing going to run because scaling down/up operations were requested. This is also the ending state after an auto-rebalancing completed successfully or failed.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* **Idle**: Initial state with a new auto-rebalancing initiated when scaling down/up operations were requested. This is also the ending state after an auto-rebalancing completed successfully or failed.
```

* **RebalanceOnScaleDown**: a rebalancing related to a scale down operation is running.
* **RebalanceOnScaleUp**: a rebalancing related to a scale up operation is running.

The FSM states' transitions are the following:

* from **Idle** to:

>   * **RebalanceOnScaleDown**: if a scale down operation was requested. This transition happens even if a scale up was requested at the same time but the rebalancing on scaling down has the precedence. The rebalancing on scale up is queued. They will run sequentially one after the other.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  * **RebalanceOnScaleDown**: if a scale down operation was requested. This transition happens even if a scale up was requested at the same time but the rebalancing on scaling down has the precedence. The rebalancing on scale up is queued. They will run sequentially.
```

* from **RebalanceOnScaleUp**:
  * **RebalanceOnScaleUp**: if a rebalancing on scale up is still running or another one was requested while the first one ended. 
  * **RebalanceOnScaleDown**: if a scale down operation was requested, so the current rebalancing scale up is stopped (and queued) and a new rebalancing scale down is started. The rebalancing scale up will be postponed.
  * **Idle**: if a scale up operation was requested, it was executed and completed successfully or failed.

On each reconciliation, the logic will be like this:

1. The `KafkaClusterCreator` creates the `KafkaCluster` instance and it includes:

   * checking the scale down (if brokers cannot be removed because they host topics' partitions) and reverting replicas count if it fails.
   * collecting the nodes reverted from scale down and the nodes added by scale up. Let's call these lists as `toBeRemovedNodes` and `addedNodes`.

2. The `KafkaReconciler.scaleDown()` scales the cluster down if the check didn't fail, or isn't aware of any scale down at all because it was just reverted within the `KafkaClusterCreator`.

> 3. The `KafkaReconciler.podSet()` scales the cluster up with the newly added brokers being ready, together with all the corresponding services, before starting an auto-rebalancing.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
3. The `KafkaReconciler.podSet()` scales the cluster up, ensuring newly added brokers are ready, together with all the corresponding services, before starting an auto-rebalancing.
```

   * rebalancing on scale down
   * rebalancing on scale up

What happens for each reconciliation depends on the auto-rebalancing FSM as well as the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource status.

The `KafkaAutoRebalancingReconciler.reconcile()` loads the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance` content:

* `state`: is the FSM state.
* `lastTransitionTime`: when the transition to that state happened.
* `modes`: enabled modes (`remove-brokers` and/or `add-brokers`) with corresponding brokers lists if an auto-rebalancing requested.
* `error`: error message if a previous auto-rebalancing failed.

The FSM is initialized based on the `state` field.

The `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[add-brokers|remove-brokers].brokers` list is filled or updated based on its current content and what's coming from `toBeRemovedNodes` and `addedNodes`.

Check the `toBeRemovedNodes`:

  * if empty
    * no further action and stay with the current `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[remove-brokers].brokers` list (which could mean being empty/not existing too).
  * if not empty

>     * update the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[remove-brokers].brokers` by using the full content from the `toBeRemovedNodes` list which always contains the nodes involved in a scale down operation. This cover the case that while rebalancing scale down running, the user requests an update on an already running one.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    * update the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[remove-brokers].brokers` by using the full content from the `toBeRemovedNodes` list which always contains the nodes involved in a scale down operation. This covers the case that while rebalancing scale down running, the user requests an update on an already running one.
```

Check the `addedNodes`:

  * if empty
    * no further action and stay with the current `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[add-brokers].brokers` list (which could mean being empty/not existing too)
  * if not empty

>     * update the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[add-brokers].brokers` by producing a consistent list with its current content and what is in the `addedNodes` list. This cover the case that while rebalancing scale down running, the user requests a new scale up or an update on an already queued one. Or even the case that while rebalancing scale up running, the user requests an update on an already running one.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    * update the `Kafka.status.autoRebalance.modes[add-brokers].brokers` by producing a consistent list with its current content and what is in the `addedNodes` list. This covers the case that while rebalancing scale down running, the user requests a new scale up or an update on an already queued one. Or even the case that while rebalancing scale up running, the user requests an update on an already running one.
```

The `Kafka` custom resource is extended by adding a new `status.autoRebalance` field.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    # ...
    autoRebalance:
      # ...
status:
  autoRebalance:
    lastTransitionTime: # timestamp of last transition during the auto-rebalancing flow
    state: # if a scaling operation is running or what's the state of the current rebalancing
    modes:
      - mode: add-brokers
        brokers: # list with brokers' IDs to add (as part of the scaling up)
      - mode: remove-brokers
        brokers: # list with brokers' IDs to remove (as part of the scaling down)
```

The `state` field provides the current state of the rebalancing process.
Its value is defined by a Finite State Machine (FSM) described in the next sections which evolves even based on the status of the corresponding "actual" `KafkaRebalance` custom resource that was created for that purpose. 
The `lastTransitionTime` field provides the timestamp of the latest auto-rebalancing state update.

> The `modes` field lists the enabled rebalancing modes, as defined through the `spec.cruiseControl.autoRebalance.mode` field, with the corresponding `brokers` list containing the brokers' IDs that are part of the scaling (up/down) actions to be useful across reconciliations.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```
This can be removed now right, since it is described on the next line differently?
